[Doc] Add design doc for dynamic linking of device code feature (#3210)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/SharedLibraries.md

# Shared DPC++ libraries

> This document describes purpose and design of Shared DPC++ libraries feature.

Reviewer: I think shared dpc++ libraries are already supported per se - this is a .dll with device binary image containing kernels.

The key new functionality is dynamic linkage of device code. Moreover, I think "shared device library" is not really accurate term as the dynamically linked device code is not shared between device images, but duplicated. So I would suggest to make that distinction throughout the document.

Reviewer 2: > Moreover, I think "shared device library" is not really accurate term as the dynamically linked device code is not shared between device images, but duplicated.

From "library" point of view, it is shared. The fact that within it some source code might be duplicated doesn't make it not shared

Author: I agree that shared libraries already supported in some form. We can rename it to something like "automatic dynamic linkage of device code".

Reviewer: > > Moreover, I think "shared device library" is not really accurate term as the dynamically linked device code is not shared between device images, but duplicated.
> 
> From "library" point of view, it is shared. The fact that within it some source code might be duplicated doesn't make it not shared

It actually does. Otherwise we could call static libraries shared, but we don't. I do believe for people with traditional C/C++ background and not familiar with SYCL offload peculiarities "shared" will sound confusing.

Author: Renamed the feature.

## Background

> Sometimes users want to provide *device* functions via shared libraries.

Reviewer: Suggest to say "Sometimes users want to link device code dynamically at run time."

I think we can model a situation where there are no shared libraries (.so/.dll) in the app, just executable, but still dynamic device code linkage is used.

Suppose we have `SYCL_EXTERNAL foo();` called from a kernel but. SYCL app can only define host variant of the function, and dynamically linked device implementation of the function is provided in a separate device binary linked via existing driver options:

a.cpp:
```cpp
SYCL_EXTERNAL void foo();
...
parallel_for([]() {  foo(); });
```
b.cpp:
```cpp
/*no SYCL_EXTERNAL*/ void foo() { ... }
```
Then user creates (or gets somewhere) a SPIRV with `foo` implementation and uses `-fsycl-add-targets` to add it to the executable.

This is not mainstream scenario, but I think design should still work in this case.

Author: I think it is possible to support this scenario with current design. However right now `fsycl-add-targets` option passes binaries to `clang-offload-wrapper` bypassing `sycl-post-link` tool.
If we will be able to run SPIR-V binaries from `-fsycl-add-targets` through `sycl-post-link` so it generates lists of exports and inputs for this binary, then it should work. @mdtoguchi , @AGindinson do you think it is possible to make such change in the driver?

Reviewer 3: > If we will be able to run SPIR-V binaries from -fsycl-add-targets through sycl-post-link so it generates lists of exports and inputs for this binary, then it should work.

How would the tool gather the information about symbols based on the SPIR-V image alone? Sorry if I'm missing out on some key concepts that I haven't acquainted myself with yet.

I understand that the driver change itself should be fairly straightforward - just adjusting the action graph for the `-fsycl-add-targets` flow.

Author: > How would the tool gather the information about symbols based on the SPIR-V image alone? Sorry if I'm missing out on some key concepts that I haven't acquainted myself with yet.

Yes, we cannot collect symbols information based only on SPIR-V image in `sycl-post-link` unless we translate it back to LLVM IR then back to SPIR-V after we collected symbols info, it doesn't seem like an optimal solution, but I guess it is still 
possible to implement, right?

Another way is to try to pass some kind of saved info along with SPIR-V image through `-fsycl-add-targets` but it will require additional work from user's side and we need somehow add possibility to save symbols info on disk, so it seems not really user-friendly.

Reviewer: It is a good point about the symbol table. There can be other kind of info which has to be attached - spec constants, dead args. Users must provide it if they want to use -fsycl-add-targets. I'm not sure if this option works today in all possible cases - probably some fixes would be needed.
There is another way to add an extra device binary - wrap all the needed files and the device binary into an object using clang-offload-wrapper and then link the SYCL app with the object, -fsycl-add-targets is supposed to be  a user-friendly shortcut to this operation. Would be actually good to have a test which attaches device dynamic lib this way.

My main point is that the design should not assume "device dynamic lib" - "host shared lib" 1-1 correspondence, as this would greatly limit flexibility of device code packaging/management. Unless there are some serious technical hurdles impractical to try to solve. But looks like this is not the case, looking at the discussion above.

Reviewer 3: To be honest, I'm failing to deduce why `-fsycl-add-targets` would be needed, at least from the above-demonstrated use-cases.
I believe that the correct way to produce a re-usable library would be to use `-shared -fPIC` (this would give a fat .so library) or `-fsycl-link` (this would give a device-only library). In both cases, the device image would end up wrapped together with all the properties that our flow has assigned to it during compile-time, including the exported/imported symbols' list. It's also known today that `-shared` mechanism is an out-of-the-box one - I've checked that a simple app can be successfully linked with a simple `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function that has been compiled into such a library (it can even be executed, due to its simplicity). `-fsycl-link` might require some additional work if someone would find it necessary to produce "strictly device-only" libraries, but the point stands. As long as we have intuitive ways of producing shared objects with SYCL specifics, and then linking apps against them by listing the new libraries as mere inputs to the link command, we do not need to consider complicated use-cases with manual, error-prone editing on the user side.

Author: I removed binding to shared libraries and added mentioned scenario.

Simple source example:
```
// App:

CGH.parallel_for<app_kernel>(/* ... */ {
  library_function();
});

// Shared library:
SYCL_EXTERNAL void library_function() {
  // do something
}
```
It is possible to manually create `sycl::program` in both app and shared
library, then use `link` SYCL API to get a single program and launch kernels
using it. But it is not user-friendly and it is very different from regular
C/C++ workflow.

> The main purpose of this feature is to provide a mechanism which allows to

Reviewer: dynamic linkage vs shared libraries distinction applies here as well

Author: Ok.

Author: Ok.

provide *device* functions via shared libraries and works as close as possible
to regular shared libraries.

## Requrements:
User's code is compiled into a shared library which consists of some host API,
device code and device API (`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions). The library is linked to
a user's application which also contains some device code and performs

> computations using DPC++/SYCL.

Reviewer: Please also support the scenario above when there is no shared library (as described above)

Author: Ok.

For this combination the following statements must be true:

- `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions from library can be called (directly or indirectly)
  from device code of the application.
- Function pointers taken in application should work inside the library.
- Specific code changes are not required, i.e. the mechanism of linking works
  as close as possible to regular shared libraries.

## Design
The overall idea is simple:

- Each device image is supplied with an information about exported and imported
  symbols using device image properties
- DPC++ RT performs *device images collection* task by grouping all device
  images required to execute a kernel based on the list of exports/imports
  - Besides symbol names, additional attributes are taken into account (like
    device image format: SPIR-V or device asm)
- Actual linking is performed by underlying backend (OpenCL/L0/etc.)

> Next sections describe details of changes in each component.

Reviewer: I suggest to extend the intro a bit for better clarity. Could you please describe here (on abstract level) how main components work together:
- what additional information is attached to device images - basically, what information export/import lists hold
- logical binding between host module and export/import lists (if any - is it dropped now?)
- how runtime performs resolution of dependencies based on that info.

Author: I described what information is attached - basically it is lists of function names.

> logical binding between host module and export/import lists (if any - is it dropped now?)

Could you please clarify what did you mean here?

Reviewer: There can be multiple .so with multiple device binary images in each. If device image imports `foo` - what is the algorithm of searching for the device binary containing `foo` definition? AFAIU from later doc, all available binary images' export lists are searched in no particular order, and the first match is returned. If so, please mention this in the overall idea. (if so, this would mean there is no logical binding between host module and export/import lists, and resolution is performed w/o regard to containing host modules)

Author: Ok, will do.

### DPC++ front-end changes

DPC++ front-end generates `module-id` attribute on each `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function.
It was generated only on kernels earlier. There are two reasons to start
generating this attribute on `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions:

- Later in pipeline, this attribute will be used by `sycl-post-link` tool to
  separate `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions from non-`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions with
  external linkage.
- `module-id` attribute also contains information about source file where the
  function comes from. This information will be used to perform device code

>   split on device images that contain only exported functions.

Reviewer: it is not clear what is module-id - could you please specify? Is this a source file only? I guess that would not be enough. Same device function can appear in multiple device images with the same source file attribute,

Reviewer 2: > I guess that would not be enough. Same device function can appear in multiple device images with the same source file attribute,

If that is a problem, I suggest to solve it separately, because `module-id` mechanism is just being re-used from device code split implementation

Reviewer: I don't know if this can be a real problem. We know that using library file name (.dll/.so) as the module ID works, but it is not clear whether using just source name can be as safe. I guess, I'd wait for the description of export/import lists and RT resolution I requested above, maybe this will address concerns about module-id.

Author: `module-id` is just a name of source file where the function was defined. It is used only for device code split mechanism. RT doesn't use this information for linking. I expanded RT changes description.

### sycl-post-link changes

> `sycl-post-link` performs 3 important tasks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support dynamic device linkage, `sycl-post-link` performs 3 main tasks:
```

notable moments though.

If a `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function is used within a kernel defined in a shared
library, it will be duplicated: one instance will be stored in the kernel's
device image and the function won't exported from this device image, while the
other will be stored in a special device image for other `SYCL_EXTERNAL`
functions and will be marked as exported there. Such duplication is need for
two reasons:
- We aim to make device images with kernels self-contained so no JIT linker
  invocations would be needed if we have definitions of all called functions.
  Also note that if AOT is requested, it would be impossible to link anything
  at runtime.
- We could export `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions from device images with kernels,
  but it would mean that when user's app calls `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function, it has
  to link a whole kernel and all its dependencies - not only it increases the
  amount of unnecessary linked code, but might also lead to build errors if the
  kernel uses some features, which are not supported by target device (and they
  are not used in the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function).
Besides separating `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions from kernels, they can be further

> split into separate device images if device code split is requested. This is

Author: Done.

done by grouping them using `module-id` attribute. Non-`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions
used by `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions with different `module-id` attributes are
copied to device images corresponding to those `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions
to make them self-contained
In case one `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function uses another `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function
with different `module-id` attribute, the second one is not copied to the
device image with the first function, but dependency between those device images
is recorder instead.

> 

Reviewer: Do we leave too much logic at sycl-post-link discretion here? My suggestions would be:
- don't make distinction between `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions and kernels as long as code splitting is concerned. They are both external linkage items in the binary image. E.g. this should not be the case and sycl-post-link should be fixed:
  > if `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function is not called by any kernel, it won't be included into any device images.

- separation of `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions from kernels as well as grouping into different binary images should ideally be user's responsibility and under his/her control, like in usual C++ tool chain. Otherwise I think post-link does too much magic behind the scenes.

I think it would be also good to describe a typical user scenario in more details from start to end to understand efficiency aspects. E.g. a users creates a shared library with a bunch of `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions (command example), which are used to resolve dynamically linked symbols for both host and device. User may request to do code-split - per-top-level-function or per TU. What happens at runtime - resolution, linkage,...

If a kernel uses external function `A`, but the dynamically linked SPIRV module contains `A` and `B` - then `B` will be linked in as well and unnecessarily JITted? Can we avoid that via e.g. requiring  llvm-link-like `-only-needed` functionality in the underlying linker, or first translating to LLVM IR, linking with `llvm-link -only-needed` then translating back to SPIRV?

Reviewer 2: > separation of `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions from kernels as well as grouping into different binary images should ideally be user's responsibility and under his/her control, like in usual C++ tool chain.

It is not clear to me how C++ users can choose which binary images their functions go to if there is only one binary image in regular C++ within a shared library? Could you please clarify what do you mean by `binary images` here in context of regular C++?

> If a kernel uses external function A, but the dynamically linked SPIRV module contains A and B - then B will be linked in as well and unnecessarily JITted? 

This is outside of our control: JIT linkage is done by underlying runtimes and not by DPC++ RT.

>  Can we avoid that via e.g. requiring llvm-link-like -only-needed functionality in the underlying linker, or first translating to LLVM IR, linking with llvm-link -only-needed then translating back to SPIRV?

I guess we can, but it should really be discussed somewhere else - this document describes DPC++ Toolchain design, not how low-level runtimes work

Reviewer: > It is not clear to me how C++ users can choose which binary images their functions go to if there is only one binary image in regular C++ within a shared library? Could you please clarify what do you mean by binary images here in context of regular C++?

By binary image I mean device binary (SPIRV) with accompanying data (e.g. symbols). Couple of ways to manually split into binaries:
- splitting the code into different .so/.dll via command line - user may create as many as needed
- semi-manual assembly of device binaries from SPIRV and the accompanying data using clang-offload-wrapper and subsequent linkage.

> I guess we can, but it should really be discussed somewhere else - this document describes DPC++ Toolchain design, not how low-level runtimes work.

This is a question of the design efficiency, so I don't see why it should not be discussed here. Toolchain can help via invoking underlying tools in efficient manner.

I believe a lot questions will go away if the design doc provides some more info I requested above:
- user scenario (preferably with multiple libraries involved)
- tool chain and RT processing - what module IDs are created, import/export lists, runtime dependence resolution and linkage.
Can you folks please add these details?

Author: I vote for arranging of `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions to separate device images. I think it is better for size of device code being compiled. What if some application has dependency on one library, device image that provides required `SYCL_EXTERNAL` definition contains not requested kernel with some dependency on other library? We may end up JITting literally everything.
It also seems simpler from cache point of view, since if `SYCL_EXTERNAL`-only modules do not contain kernels we won't accidentally compile some unnecessary kernels while resolving some dependency, so we don't need to care about them in cache.

Author: The design was updated so we don't arrange SYCL_EXTERNAL functions to a separate device image. Instead, sycl-post-link will consider them as entry points during device code split.

After `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions are arranged into a separate device image(s),

> all non-`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions are internalized to avoid multiple definition

Author: Done.

  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsBegin;
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsEnd;
};

```
Each property set is represent by the following struct:
```
// Named array of properties.
struct _pi_device_binary_property_set_struct {
  char *Name;                                // the name
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesBegin; // array start
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesEnd;   // array end
};
```
It contains name of property set and array of properties. Each property is
represented by the following struct:
```
struct _pi_device_binary_property_struct {
  char *Name;       // null-terminated property name
  void *ValAddr;    // address of property value
  uint32_t Type;    // _pi_property_type
  uint64_t ValSize; // size of property value in bytes
};
```

List of imported symbols is represented as a single property set with name
`ImportedSymbols` recorded in the `Name` field of property set.
Each property in this set holds name of the particular imported symbol recorded
in the `Name` field of the property.
List of exported symbols is represented in the same way, except the
corresponding set has the name `ExportedSymbols`.

### DPC++ runtime changes

> DPC++ RT performs *device images collection* task by grouping all device

Reviewer 2: I think it is important to mention when it is supposed to happen. 

For SYCL 1.2.1 I would expect this happen only if regular `parallel_for` overload is used and by regular I mean one which does not accept `kernel` object which was extracted from explicitly created `program` object like it is shown in intel/llvm#3180. I.e. if user manipulates somehow with programs - it is responsible to link all required device code himself; if user just wants to launch the kernel, DPC++ runtime will automatically link required code from shared libraries for the user.

I'm not yet familiar enough with SYCL 2020 (especially with sections related to device programs management) to suggest particular way of handling shared libraries there, but I would prefer following the same logic: if user does something with programs, it is then his responsibility to link required device code.

Author: I don't think that we don't need to resolve dependencies automatically when SYCL 2020 kernel bundles are involved. Linking of `kernel_bundle` doesn't seem like the same thing as `program` linking from SYCL 1.2.1. `link` API for kernel bundles does not guarantee that all device images from linked kernel bundles will be merged into one device image. Instead it looks like union of sets of device images and then translation to executable state. But, executable state means that all device images from kernel bundle are ready be executed on device and therefore they don't have dependencies. So, it seems like `link` API for kernel bundles does not require linking all underlying device images into one, but it requires symbols resolution if there are any dependencies between device images.

> DPC++ RT performs *device images collection* task by grouping all device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DPC++ RT performs *device images dependence resolution* task by grouping all device
```

Reviewer 2: Please note that this is not `symbol resolution` operation, which is performed by dynamic linkers while loading an executable: if the same symbol is available in two libraries, dynamic linker is able to ignore the second definition and use the first one it encountered. However, in our case we do not dictate which exact symbol will be used when it is needed - we can only combine a few device images together and pass them further to low-level runtimes. If we go with resolution, then I suggest that we remove asterisks, because they were intended to emphasize `collection` word

Reviewer: Yes, I understand this is not the same on host. As I can see, collection is a part of dependence resolution, which needs to happen anyway. I'd appreciate describing it in more details (already requested in couple of places above). Thanks!

images required to execute a kernel based on the list of exports/imports and
links them together using PI API.

Given that all exports will be arranged to a separate device images without
kernels it is reasonable to store device images with exports in a separate data
structure.

> 

Reviewer: Please specify resolution process in more details. Please address a situation when there are multiple host shared objects in addition to executables, with multiple device binary images in each. The same name can be exported from multiple images. How runtime finds images to satisfy a dependence? Uses the first found? A lot depends on module-id here i guess, so it should be specified in full detail (I also requested this above). In practice there can be 1000s of modules (or even more) when splitting is engaged, so dependence resolution performance will likely matter.

Author: > How runtime finds images to satisfy a dependence? Uses the first found?
It uses the first found.

> The same name can be exported from multiple images.

If these images export the same function under this name, then it is not important which device image will be taken (since the symbol is same). If these same named functions are different, then ODR violation takes place. This is undefined behavior. We don't guarantee that it will work as user expects.

> 

Reviewer: Please add some words about device code caching in presence of dynamic linkage. Will it work?
Runtime-only caching or persistent (on-disk) too?

Reviewer: - Does it make sense to have an API to force loading device code similar to `dlopen` - something like `sycl::INTEL::devdlopen("foo.spv")` to make foo.spv part of dynamic symbol resolution?
- AFAIU, device code modules loaded via other mechanisms - L0, OpenCL - won't be used for dynamic resolution - correct?

Reviewer 2: > Does it make sense to have an API to force loading device code similar to `dlopen` - something like `sycl::INTEL::devdlopen("foo.spv")` to make foo.spv part of dynamic symbol resolution?

If someone finds this useful, we could do that, I don't see any obstacles here

> AFAIU, device code modules loaded via other mechanisms - L0, OpenCL - won't be used for dynamic resolution - correct?

At least this is my vision of this feature as I stated it here: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/3210#discussion_r575388163

Reviewer: OK, thanks. What about caching?

Author: Described caching. I beleive in-memory cache should work without out of the box, however we may need some changes in device images identifying mechanism for persistent cache.

Reviewer 4: It looks like the plan is to JIT compile the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions into native code and then cache the results **before** they are linked into the calling kernel.  If we find a kernel that calls one of these functions, the calling kernel will be compiled to native code, and then we will link the two native pieces together (the kernel and the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function).  Is that correct?

We considered a similar design for the "device library" code, but we rejected it.  The problem is that you miss opportunity for cross-function optimization in this case, which is particularly important for GPU code.  It's much better to link the two SPIR-V modules together first, and then compile the whole thing into native code.  This way, the JIT compiler can optimize across the call site to the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function.

If you follow this approach, you wouldn't need to cache native code for any of the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions.  Instead, you would only cache native code for the device images that contain complete kernels.

Author: I was following the logic of OpenCL `clCompileProgram` and `clLinkProgram` assuming that available PI API will work in the same way. `clLinkProgram` accepts only compiled programs, so the plan was to use `clCompileProgram` on library device image and store it in cache. Probably I was under impression that `clCompileProgram` API is invocation of frontend, but since our main format is SPIR-V - then frontend was already ran and most likely `clCompileProgram` will be a noop.
Is there any API to link device images before they compiled (or is there any API to link SPIR-V device images)?

Reviewer 4: > Probably I was under impression that clCompileProgram API is invocation of frontend, but since our main format is SPIR-V - then frontend was already ran and most likely clCompileProgram will be a noop.

Correct, `clCompileProgram()` is a noop in this case and it's `clLinkProgram()` that really does the compilation from SPIR-V to native.

Reviewer 2: Note: it might not be a pure noop, for example `clCompileProgram` will perform SPIR-V specialization: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs/issues/553

# Dynamic linking of device code

This document describes purpose and design of dynamic linking of device code
feature.

## Background
Sometimes users want to link device code dynamically at run time. One possible
use case for such linkage - providing device functions via shared libraries.
Simple source example:
```
// App:

CGH.parallel_for<app_kernel>(/* ... */ {
  library_function();
});

// Shared library:
SYCL_EXTERNAL void library_function() {
  // do something
}
```
It is possible to manually create `sycl::program` in both app and shared
library, then use `link` SYCL API to get a single program and launch kernels
using it. But it is not user-friendly and it is very different from regular
C/C++ workflow.

Another possible scenario - use functions defined in pre-compiled device image
provided by user. Example:
```
// a.cpp
SYCL_EXTERNAL void foo();
...

> parallel_for([]() { foo(); });

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
CGH.parallel_for(() { foo(); });
```

// b.cpp
/*no SYCL_EXTERNAL*/ void foo() { ... }
```
We have a `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function `foo` called from a kernel, but the
application defined only host version of this function. Then user adds device

> image with definition of `foo` to the fat object via special option.

Author: > I would expect this application to result in an error at (static) link time.

There will be no such errors. Such errors now are emitted only by host linker and the function `foo` definition is missing only in device code (due to missing `SYCL_EXTERNAL` macro), however it is present in host code. We use llvm-link as linker of device LLVM IR, it doesn't emit errors if some function is not defined in final linked module. I also don't think we need such error emission (if there is such functionality in llvm-link) because we use undefined functions to represent SPIR-V operations in LLVM IR (please see https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign.md#integration-with-spir-v-format for details).

> The last sentence says something about defining device function "foo" via some special option, but there is no further description of this option.

Yes. @kbobrovs mentioned `fsycl-add-targets` option when suggested this use case (https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/3210#discussion_r575756500). This option allows to supply fat binary with additional device binaries. However this option won't work out of the box now because dynamic linking (and also some other features like spec constants) also require additional information to be generated for each device image and there is no way to add this info through `-fsycl-add-targets` option. That is why I didn't mention the name of this option.

> Does this design also propose some DPC++ extension that allows a new way of defining device functions?

No, it doesn't. The point of this example was that we can actually use dynamic linking not only when shared libraries are involved, but for such use cases when user created device image separately and then supplied the fat binary with it. Such possibility to supply fat binary with some device image existed some time ago and I would consider it as a feature of our implementation rather than language feature.

> image with definition of `foo` to the fat object via special option.

Reviewer 4: OK, thanks for the explanation.

The main purpose of this feature is to provide a mechanism which allows to
link device code dynamically at runtime.

## Requrements:
User's device code that consists of some device API (`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions),
is compiled into some form and it is not linked statically with device code of
application. It can be a shared library that contains some device code or a
separate device image supplied with property information. This code is linked
dynamically at run time with device code of a user's application in order to
resolve dependencies.
For this combination the following statements must be true:

- `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions defined in dynamically linked code can be called
  (directly or indirectly) from device code of the application.

> - Function pointers taken in application ashould work inside the dynamically

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Function pointers taken in application should work inside the dynamically
```

all non-`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions and `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions left in device
images with kernels marked with internal linkage to avoid multiple definition
errors during runtime linking.
Device images with `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions will also get a list of names
of exported functions attached to them through device image properties
(described below).

**NOTE**: If device code split is enabled, it seems reasonable to perform
exports arrangement before device code split procedure.

In order to collect information about imported symbols `sycl-post-link` looks
through LLVM IR and for each declared but not defined symbol records its name,
except the following cases:
- Declarations with `__` prefix in demangled name are not recorded as imported
  functions
  - Declarations with `__spirv_*` prefix should not be recorded as dependencies
  since they represent SPIR-V operations and will be transformed to SPIR-V
  instructions during LLVM->SPIR-V translation.
- Based on some attributes (which could be defined later) we may want to avoid
  listing some functions as imported ones
  - This is needed to have possibility to call device-specific builtins not

>     starting with `__` by forward-declaring them in DPC++ code

Reviewer 4: Is there a danger that we will lose some error reporting?  Consider an application where a kernel calls a `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function that is not defined anywhere.  Currently, this causes an error from the static linker.  Will that still be the case once we implement this support for shared libraries?

It seems like this design might prevent the error from being reported when the static (ahead of time) linker runs.   According to the description above, a kernel reference to an undefined function will be assumed to be an import from a shared library, right?  I assume that means you will **not** get an error from the static linker, and you will instead get a runtime exception when the runtime fails to find an exported definition of the function.

Is my understanding correct?

Reviewer 4: Thanks for the clarification.  I didn't realize that we depended on the host linker for these errors, but I see that you are correct.  (I verified this also with a test case.)  I agree that we will not lose any error reporting with this design.

contains any import information in its properies and if it does, then RT
performs device images collection in order to resolve dependencies.

Ids of all needed symbol sets are found. This is done by iterating through
`m_SymbolSets` map, i.e. iterating through all available OS modules without
predefined order and searching for first unresolved symbol in list of imports
set of target device image. Once device image that contains first symbol is
met, remaining exported symbols are checked in found image and if
they match some imported symbols then these matched symbols will be marked as
resolved. The procedure repeats until all imported symbols are resolved.
For each found symbol set Id program cache is checked in case if
necessary set of `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions has been compiled and if it is true,
then compiled device image will be re-used for linking.
Otherwise device image containing required symbols set will be compiled and
stored in cache.

#### Program caching

Existing support for device code caching is re-used to cache programs created
from device images with SYCL external functions and linked device images with
imports information.

##### In-memory cache

> Programs that contain only `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions will be cached only in
> compiled state, so they can be linked with other programs during dependency
> resolution.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Programs that contain only `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions will be cached only when exported 
functions are used by images with kernels and identified by `main` image Id.
So once two kernel from different images use functions from the same `library` image it will
be duplicated in cache after linking with main programs during dependency
resolution.
```

Author: Okay, there can be two cases when `SYCL_EXTERNAL`-only images are cached in in-memory cache:
- Inside the `main` image, i.e. after it is linked with all its dependencies (the case that you described in your suggestion)
- Non-linked `SYCL_EXTERNAL`-only images in compiled state. It can be done when some "main" image requested some `SYCL_EXTERNAL`-only image as dependency, we created a program for `SYCL_EXTERNAL`-only image, compiled it and stored in cache, so we don't have to do it again when some other `main` requests the same `SYCL_EXTERNAL` image. (the case that I tried to describe here). The idea was taken from existing cache for standard device libraries (see https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/86716c542268b8a1ad104c85b783cfc6cb593cc9/sycl/source/detail/context_impl.hpp#L177).

Does it make sense?

The existing mechanism of caching is not changed for programs with
imports information. They are stored in cache after they compiled and linked
with programs that provide their dependencies. To identify linked programs
Id of "main" set of symbols (i.e. the one which actually contain kernels) will
be used.

##### Persistent cache

The documented approach to persistent cache needs to be expanded in presence
of dynamic linking support. One of the identifiers for built image hash is
hash made out of device image used as input for the JIT compilation.
In case when "main" image have imports information, device image hash should be
created from all device images that are necessary to build it, i.e. hash out
of "main" device image and set of 'SYCL_EXTERNAL'-only images that define all

> symbols imported by "main device image.

Reviewer 6: Current approach assume storing final binary after linking it means:
 - duplication of library images in every `main` program;
 - on change of library all `main` images in persistent cache are invalidated and JIT is initiated.
May be it is reasonable to store library `images` in cache separately from `main` image? It can be done both for in-memory and persistent or only for persistent cache depending on `weight` of link operation for binary programs.

Author: > May be it is reasonable to store library images in cache separately from main image? It can be done both for in-memory and persistent or only for persistent cache depending on weight of link operation for binary programs.

Do you mean compile to binary "main" image and "library" image and store them on disk separately? It sounds reasonable (the real dynamic libraries actually work this way), however I don't think we have devices that support linking of native device binaries yet, so right now It doesn't seem possible.

# Dynamic linking of device code

This document describes purpose and design of dynamic linking of device code
feature.

## Background
Sometimes users want to link device code dynamically at run time. One possible
use case for such linkage - providing device functions via shared libraries.

> Example:

Reviewer 7: +1

Description of examples should be added.

mechanism.

Each device image is supplied with an array of property sets:
```
struct pi_device_binary_struct {
...
  // Array of property sets
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsBegin;
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsEnd;
};

```
Each property set is represented by the following struct:
```
// Named array of properties.
struct _pi_device_binary_property_set_struct {
  char *Name;                                // the name
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesBegin; // array start
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesEnd;   // array end
};
```
It contains name of property set and array of properties. Each property is
represented by the following struct:
```
struct _pi_device_binary_property_struct {
  char *Name;       // null-terminated property name
  void *ValAddr;    // address of property value
  uint32_t Type;    // _pi_property_type
  uint64_t ValSize; // size of property value in bytes
};
```

List of imported symbols is represented as a single property set with name
`SYCL/imported symbols` recorded in the `Name` field of property set.
Each property in this set holds name of the particular imported symbol recorded

> in the `Name` field of the property.

Author: No expectations, since only "Name" field will be used.

List of exported symbols is represented in the same way, except the
corresponding set has the name `SYCL/exported symbols`.

> ### DPC++ runtime changes

Reviewer 4: I found it very difficult to understand the big picture for the DPC++runtime changes.  It would be nice to have an overview up front.  Maybe something like this:

> The overall strategy is as follows.  When the application submits an offload kernel to execution on a device, the runtime uses the `SYCL/imported symbols` attribute from the kernel's device image to find the set of symbols it imports.  The runtime then searches for device images that export these same symbols by searching their `SYCL/exported symbols` attributes.  This symbol resolution algorithm results in a list of device images that need to be linked together.
>
> The design currently supports only the case when all these device images are in SPIR-V format.  The runtime passes the list of device images to the PI API, which compiles and links the SPIR-V modules together into a single native device image.  This native device image is then added to the cache to avoid symbol resolution, compilation, and linking for any future attempts to invoke kernels from this device image.
>
> Note that the PI API does not use the `SYCL/imported symbols` or `SYCL/exported symbols` attributes to perform the linking of the SPIR-V modules.  Instead, functions in the SPIR-V modules must be annotated with the SPIR-V `Import` and `Export` linkage types.  The PI API layer uses these annotations to perform that actual linking of function references across SPIR-V modules.

Note that I'm not really sure this is how the design will work, but I think this is what you intend.  Can you confirm if my overall understanding of the runtime design is accurate?

Author: I think your understanding is correct, except that the design doesn't actually depend on device images format. I.e. the algorithm of searching won't be changed if device images are pre-compiled native device binaries.

Reviewer 4: Sure, the symbol-search part of the algorithm can probably work for device images in native code format.  However, I think the online linking part will only work for device images in SPIR-V format.

Reviewer 4: I also wanted to stress that I think it's important to add some description similar to what I suggest to the introduction to the "DPC++ runtime changes" section.  I think this will clarify the following points which are currently unclear:

* The `SYCL/imported symbols` and `SYCL/exported symbols` attributes are used only by the runtime's symbol resolution algorithm.  The PI API layer relies on the SPIR-V `Import` and `Export` linkage annotations, so these must also be present.

* The linking part of the design works only for device images in SPIR-V format.

* The only things added to the cache are fully linked device images.  We do not cache device images with `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions that are compiled and not yet linked.

Author: > The linking part of the design works only for device images in SPIR-V format.

I don't agree with you here. Yes, right now we don't have backends that support linking of native device binaries. But we don't say that it is not possible in the future.  I think format of device image shouldn't affect design of runtime changes. Most likely when linking of native device binaries is supported, it won't matter for runtime which format device image has, it will just call some PI API for link.

Reviewer 4: The PI API and the PI implementation layer are part of DPC++, so I think this design document should include any changes that are needed in that layer.  Currently, the PI layer assumes (I think) that it is only possible to link together SPIR-V modules.  If we want to enable the ability to link native modules, we would need some extension to the PI API.

Likewise, if the design requires changes to either the Level Zero or OpenCL interface, it should state this requirement.  Those teams won't make any changes unless we give them some requirement.

If we do not intend to do any of these things at this time, then I think it's fair to say that the design does not currently support dynamic linking of device images in native format.

At a more practical level, a reader of this document should be able to tell if there is a limitation about native format device images  That's an important limitation, which we should clearly communicate to avoid confusion later.

Author: > Currently, the PI layer assumes (I think) that it is only possible to link together SPIR-V modules.

I can’t actually find any specification for PI API where it says about format of input device images.
But, if this is right, we may need some additional PI API to link native device binaries and this part should be included into current design.
@kbobrovs , @smaslov-intel , could you please help to understand whether do we need some additions to PI API in order to support runtime linking of AOT-compiled binaries?

Reviewer: PI defines:
```cpp
__SYCL_EXPORT pi_result
piProgramLink(pi_context context, pi_uint32 num_devices,
              const pi_device *device_list, const char *options,
              pi_uint32 num_input_programs, const pi_program *input_programs,
              void (*pfn_notify)(pi_program program, void *user_data),
              void *user_data, pi_program *ret_program);
```
this seem quite suitable to me to model linkage of programs in any state. Allowing native format for linked programs, if it is not already allowed, is not breaking backward compatibility. So I would not expect problems (unless there is some specifics in dynamic linkage not covered by this API).

Reviewer 4: Be careful about this.  The Level Zero native code linking feature (which doesn't quite work yet), behaves quite differently from SPIR-V linking.  Native code linking does not create a new linked image.  Instead, it does in-place patching of the input images.  To illustrate, if you link native images A, B, and C together; the operation modifies all three images in-place.  (It does **not** create some new image D that represents the linked result.)  If you later link A with some other module E; this might undo the linking of A, B, and C.

There is some code in the Level Zero PI layer to handle this (which I wrote), but I'm not sure it's the right direction.  I was actually planning to remove all that code once we have SPIR-V linking in Level Zero.

Also note that this weird "in-place" patching semantic may affect the way the cache works.  Because native code linking does not create a new result image, you can't cache the resulting "linked image".

Reviewer 8: I don't see why existing `piProgramLink` isn't sufficient. Note that it is already linking `_pi_program::Object` modules, not SPIR-V: https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ef4e6ddce56fe21621bca7d62932713152de3f0e/sycl/plugins/level_zero/pi_level_zero.hpp#L635

```
    // The program consists of native code (typically compiled from SPIR-v),
    // but it has unresolved external dependencies which need to be resolved
    // by linking with other Object state program(s).  Programs in this state
    // have a single Level Zero module.
```

Reviewer: > Be careful about this. The Level Zero native code linking feature (which doesn't quite work yet), behaves quite differently from SPIR-V linking. Native code linking does not create a new linked image. Instead, it does in-place patching of the input images.

Understood, thanks. Still, I don't see how this affects the PI API? It affects implementation - true. LevelZero plugin might need to copy before calling LevelZero linkage. - ?

But in-place patching is really not quite intuitive - I agree.

> Also note that this weird "in-place" patching semantic may affect the way the cache works. Because native code linking does not create a new result image, you can't cache the resulting "linked image".

Why would we need to cache anything when the code is already compiled (native)?

Reviewer 4: > Why would we need to cache anything when the code is already compiled (native)?

My understanding of the design is that with SPIR-V modules we will link all the dependent modules together first and then cache the result.  My point is that the strategy will be different for native modules.  It does not make sense to cache the result of native linking because of the in-place semantic.  Therefore the caching strategy is different between SPIR-V and native cases.

> Understood, thanks. Still, I don't see how this affects the PI API? It affects implementation - true. LevelZero
> plugin might need to copy before calling LevelZero linkage. - ?

Perhaps we will decide to use the same PI API in both cases.  My point is that something here will need to change.  Either we add a new PI API or we re-use the existing API for both SPIR-V and native cases.  Either way, something needs to change.  The main goal of my comment here was to point out that this area of the runtime will need changes if we want to support native modules, and there is no mention of that in the design document.

Reviewer 2: > It does not make sense to cache the result of native linking because of the in-place semantic.

I think this in-place semantic is implementation detail of PI Level Zero plugin, because it might not be the case for OpenCL, for example. And we are actually in control of the API here: we can say that `piProgramLink` must not modify inputs and therefore to DPC++ layer this in-place semantic wouldn't matter at all. It would just be hidden somewhere in implementation below.

Reviewer 2: > this seem quite suitable to me to model linkage of programs in any state. Allowing native format for linked programs, if it is not already allowed, is not breaking backward compatibility. So I would not expect problems (unless there is some specifics in dynamic linkage not covered by this API).

I think one more important thing here is that DPC++ RT should be able to understand whether it can pass native binaries to link API or not: at the moment we don't have capabilities to link native binaries with all underlying runtimes we support so that is important. I was thinking about new PI interface or extension to `piDeviceGetInfo` - @smaslov-intel, @kbobrovs what do you think?

Reviewer 8: @AlexeySachkov , extending the `piDeviceGetInfo` would be reasonable if really needed. What are the backends that cannot link native binaries? From https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL//sdk/2.2/docs/man/html/clLinkProgram.html:

> input_programs is an array of program objects that are compiled binaries or libraries that are to be linked to create the program executable. 

CUDA also takes PTX as an input: https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-driver-api/group__CUDA__MODULE.html#group__CUDA__MODULE_1g3ebcd2ccb772ba9c120937a2d2831b77

Reviewer: Extending piDeviceGetInfo makes sense to me.

One can say that SDV who uses DPC++ should know if particular device supports native linkage or not and prepare binaries accordingly, and that would be true. But in presence of both forms - SPIRV and native (maybe more in theory), of the dynamically linked app and device libraries, this can be a decisive factor for SYCL RT. And the extension of the GetInfo is really cheap.

> What are the backends that cannot link native binaries?

I believe Intel OpenCL GPU is one example. There can be more from other vendors.

Reviewer 8: > I believe Intel OpenCL GPU is one example.

Isn't the excerpt from OpenCL API I gave above telling us it is linking "native binaries"?

Reviewer 4: > Isn't the excerpt from OpenCL API I gave above telling us it is linking "native binaries"?

You should check with the OpenCL team.  My understanding is that `clCompileProgram()` is a no-op and `clLinkProgram()` actually does a combined SPIR-V link + compile operation.  I do not think it is possible to use `clLinkProgram()` to link native modules together if you no longer have the original SPIR-V.

Reviewer 2: @smaslov-intel, my understanding is that in OpenCL terminology, `compiled` != `built`. `compiled` is an object form, i.e. front-end is passed, but no executable binary was produced yet. I can't find strong proof of that in the spec, but I'm sure that our (Intel) CPU & GPU compilers won't accept native binaries in `clLinkProgram`

Reviewer 8: https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL/sdk/2.2/docs/man/html/clCompileProgram.html

> The compiled binary can be queried using clGetProgramInfo(program, CL_PROGRAM_BINARIES, ...) and can be specified to clCreateProgramWithBinary to create a new program object.

Compile does produce "binary", otherwise the above wouldn't be possible.
Who can clarify it exactly?

Reviewer 2: > Compile does produce "binary", otherwise the above wouldn't be possible.
> Who can clarify it exactly?

I think @bashbaug should be able to clarify this.

In the meantime: 

From [clCreateKernel](https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL/sdk/2.0/docs/man/xhtml/clCreateKernel.html):
> Parameters
> program
> A program object with a successfully built executable.

From [clBuildProgram](https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL/sdk/2.0/docs/man/xhtml/clBuildProgram.html):
> Builds (compiles and links) a program executable from the program source or binary.

From [clLinkProgram](https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL/sdk/2.0/docs/man/xhtml/clLinkProgram.html):
> Links a set of compiled program objects and libraries for all the devices or a specific device(s) in the OpenCL context and creates an executable.

From [clCompileProgram](https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL/sdk/2.0/docs/man/xhtml/clCompileProgram.html):
> Compiles a program’s source for all the devices or a specific device(s) in the OpenCL context associated with program.

It seems to me that intent was that `clCompileProgram` does not generate an executable, but only creates some intermediate object file instead

Reviewer 9: +1.
From clGetProgramInfo(https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL/sdk/1.0/docs/man/xhtml/clGetProgramInfo.html) desc:

> Return the program binaries for all devices associated with program. For each device in program, the binary returned can be the binary specified for the device when program is created with clCreateProgramWithBinary or it can be the executable binary generated by clBuildProgram. If program is created with clCreateProgramWithSource, the binary returned is the binary generated by clBuildProgram. The bits returned can be an implementation-specific intermediate representation (a.k.a. IR) or device specific executable bits or both. The decision on which information is returned in the binary is up to the OpenCL implementation.

Reviewer 8: > The decision on which information is returned in the binary is up to the OpenCL implementation.

Can we somehow query OpenCL about what is in the binary such that we could properly control it's linking?

DPC++ RT performs *device images collection* task by grouping all device
images required to execute a kernel based on the list of exports/imports and
links them together using PI API.

#### Device images collection

DPC++ Runtime class named ProgramManager stores device images using following
data structure:
```
/// Keeps all available device executable images added via \ref addImages.
/// Organizes the images as a map from a kernel set id to the vector of images
/// containing kernels from that set.
/// Access must be guarded by the \ref Sync::getGlobalLock()
std::unordered_map<SymbolSetId,
                   std::unique_ptr<std::vector<RTDeviceBinaryImageUPtr>>>
    m_DeviceImages;

> using StrToKSIdMap = std::unordered_map<string_class, SymbolSetId>;

Author: I think use-case when kernels have the same name is not really legal. SYCL 2020 spec says "In the case of the shared-source compilation model, the kernels have to be uniquely identified by both host and device compiler.". So if two kernels (even if they are in different objects) have the same name, they don't really uniquely identified, right?

> using StrToKSIdMap = std::unordered_map<string_class, SymbolSetId>;

Reviewer 7: Let's have the following use-case:
```c++
// Application
queue Q;
Lib1Func(Q);
Lib2Func(Q);

// Lib1
void Lib1Func(queue &Q) {
  Q.sbumit([](handle &H) {
    H.parallel_for<class Calculate>(...);
  });
}

// Lib2
void Lib2Func(queue &Q) {
  Q.sbumit([](handle &H) {
    H.parallel_for<class Calculate>(...);
  });
}

```

Is this use-case handled by SYCL 2020 spec?

> using StrToKSIdMap = std::unordered_map<string_class, SymbolSetId>;

Author: I'm not sure that SYCL 2020 (or other) spec say something about such use cases, especially when libraries are involved. However, looking at this comment https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/3210#discussion_r612066000 , I think this case is illegal. @gmlueck , could you please confirm?

> using StrToKSIdMap = std::unordered_map<string_class, SymbolSetId>;

Reviewer 4: I believe this is illegal because the spec says this:

> In the case of the shared-source compilation model, the kernels have to be **uniquely identified** by both host and device compiler. 

The spec could certainly be more clear about this, though.  I'll propose updated wording to the SYCL 2020 spec clarifying that a kernel name must be unique across the entire application.

Note that it **is** legal for two translation units (or two libraries) to call the **same** kernel, in which case both instances of the kernel will have the same name.  For example, consider a named kernel object that is called from two different libraries:

```
class MyKernel {
 public:
  void operator()(item<1> it) const {
    /* kernel code */
  }
};
```

In such a case, both libraries will have a definition of the kernel named `MyKernel`.  The design will need to support cases like this.

/// Maps names of kernels from a specific OS module (.exe .dll) to their set
/// id (the sets are disjoint).
std::unordered_map<OSModuleHandle, SymbolSetId> m_SymbolSets;
```
Assume each device image represents some combination of symbols and different
device images may contain only exactly the same or not overlapping combination

> of symbols. If it is not so, there can be two cases:

Author: First we assume, then we think what can happen if our assumption is wrong. I'll try to make it more clear.

>   - Symbols are the same. In this case it doesn't matter which device image is

Author: Only by name.

  taken to use duplicated symbol
  - Symbols are not the same. In this case ODR violation takes place, such
  situation leads to undefined behaviour. For more details refer to
  [ODR violations](#ODR-violations) section.

Each combination of symbols is assigned with an Id number - symbol set Id.
A combination of symbols can exist in different formats (i.e. SPIR-V/AOT
compiled binary and etc).

> `m_DeviceImages` maps an Id number to an array with device images which represent

Reviewer 9: NIT.
Suggest being more generic here - just describing the logic of what program manager should do rather than defining exact fields which will be used should be enough for the design document. For example something like: "when the program manager gets a request to JIT compile a device image(program) it examines its list of imported symbols and finds device images which exports those symbols, then links requested device image and images found together".
Low level details can be added once the implementation is done if needed.

the same combination of symbols in different formats.
`m_SymbolSets` contains mapping from symbol name to symbol set Id for each OS
module (.exe/.so/.dll).

> `std::unordered_map` allows to search and access its elements with constant-time

Author: I think I'll follow Vlad's comment and reduce details of this section by removing concrete field names and std structures used here.

complexity.

Before compilation of device image, to execute a kernel RT checks if the image
contains any import information in its properties and if it does, then RT
performs device images collection in order to resolve dependencies.

Ids of all needed symbol sets are found by iterating through
`m_SymbolSets` map, i.e. iterating through all available OS modules without

> predefined order and searching for first unresolved symbol in list of imports

Reviewer 7: > without predefined order

Is there any hint what the resulting order depends on?

Author: With the current structure it will depend on OSModule handles.

of target device image. Once device image that contains first symbol is
met, remaining exported symbols are checked in found image. If
they match some imported symbols then these matched symbols will be marked as
resolved. The procedure repeats until all imported symbols are marked as

> resolved.

Reviewer 7: What happens if no resolution could be found for an arbitrary symbol?

Author: I think in this case exception should be emitted. Or we can just pass unlinked module to the JIT compiler and it will an emit error.

Reviewer 7: I believe, behaviour for such a case should be documented.

Author: Done.

#### Program caching

Existing support for device code caching can be re-used to cache
dynamically linked programs with slight changes.

##### In-memory cache

The existing mechanism of caching can be re-used in presence of dynamic
linking. Example:
```
// Application
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc1();
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc2();

Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {
CGH.parallel_for<InternalKernel>( ... )
}); // 1. Device Image is compiled and linked into a program and saved in cache
    // 2. Prepared program is used to enqueue kernel

Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {
handler.parallel_for([] { LibFunc1(); }); // Prepared program is used to enqueue kernel
});

// Library
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc1() {
// ...
}

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc2() {
// ...
}
```

Author: This one is not used in the example, so I'll just probably remove the declaration from the app.

```
In current cache structure the programs map's key consists of four components:
kernel set id, specialization constants values, the device this program is built
for, build options id. In this example Id of kernel set where application's
kernels can be used to access program cache. However when shared library
defines kernels and these kernels are run by the application unchanged cache
structure may lead to double compilation of the same code. Example:
```
// Application
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc();

Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {
handler.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });  // Device image for library is compiled
                                          // and linked together with device
                                          // image for application, i.e.

>                                           // LibFunc1 and ExternalKernel exist

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                                          // LibFunc and ExternalKernel (defined below) exist
```

> handler.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });  // Device image for library is compiled
>                                           // and linked together with device
>                                           // image for application, i.e.
>                                           // LibFunc1 and ExternalKernel exist
>                                           // in prepared state

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  handler.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });  // Device image for library is compiled
                                            // and linked together with device
                                            // image for application, i.e.
                                            // LibFunc1 and ExternalKernel exist
                                            // in prepared state
```

});
// ...
EnqueueLibraryKernel(Q); // If cache mechanism is not changed, this line will
                         // lead to second compilation of ExternalKernel and

>                          // LibFunc1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                         // LibFunc
```

// Library

> SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc1() {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc() {
```

// ...
}

EnqueueLibraryKernel(queue) {
  queue.submit(parallel_for<ExternalKernel>(...));
}
```
Such case can be optimized by bringing nesting into cache keys structure.

> Kernel set id can be found for each kernel using its name and OS module it is

Reviewer 9: BTW.
OS module is likely will be removed together with kernel set id (sycl/source/detail/program_manager/program_manager.cpp:1229). I think we will just update the design accordingly once it's done.

coming from. In presence of dynamic linking resulting program can be combined
out of device images which come from different OS modules. So, it should be
possible to find needed program by kernel name and any OS module that was
involved in this program. The new mapping structure is:
```
{kernel name} =>
  {OSModuleHandle, spec const, opts, dev} => program
```
I.e. each kernel name is mapped to a set of tuples that consists of OS module,
spec constant values, JIT compiler options, device. Then concrete tuple is
mapped to a program object.
Example:
```
// Application
// OSModule = 1

SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc();
queue.submit(parallel_for<InternalKernel>( ... ));

Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {

> CGH.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  CGH.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });
```

});

EnqueueLibraryKernel(q);

// Library
// OSModule = 2

> SYCL_EXTERNAL lib1_func();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SYCL_EXTERNAL LibFunc();
```

EnqueueLibraryKernel(queue) {
  queue.submit(parallel_for<ExternalKernel>(...));
}

Program cache will have the following structure:
 "InternalKernel" =>
   {1, ...} => program 1
 "ExternalKernel" =>
   {1, ...} => program 1

>    {2, ...} => program 1

Reviewer 7: Need to point that some of the cache items are virtually artificial, i.e. they're prepared at some point.
For instance, one might get confused, how `ExternalKernel => {2, ...} => program 1` gets into cache instead of `ExternalKernel => {2, ...} => program 2`.

Author: I've tried to explain it a bit, please see lines 335-342.

```
However the library code will be compiled twice if kernel from the library
was enqueued before kernels from the application, i.e. in such case:
```
// Application
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc();

EnqueueLibraryKernel(Q); // First, library code is compiled alone since it
                         // doesn't have any dependencies
// ...
Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {

> handler.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });  // Second, library code is compiled
>                                           // and linked together with code of
>                                           // the application

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  handler.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });  // Second, library code is compiled
                                            // and linked together with code of
                                            // the application
```

});
```

> The program caching mechanism is re-used without changes.

Reviewer 7: The program caching mechanism was changed in the above text.
Should this sentence say about kernel cache structure?

Author: Yes, it should say about kernel cache. Will fix that.

##### Persistent cache

The documented approach to persistent cache needs to be expanded in presence
of dynamic linking support. One of the identifiers for built image hash is
hash made out of device image used as input for the JIT compilation.
In case when "main" image have imports information, device image hash should be
created from all device images that are necessary to build it, i.e. hash out
of "main" device image and set of images that define all
symbols imported by "main" device image.

## Corner cases and limitations

It is not guaranteed that behaviour of host shared libraries and device shared

> libraries will always match. There are several cases when it can occur, the

Reviewer 7: > There are several cases when it can occur

What is "it"? Matching of behaviour of host and device shared libraries or discrepancy of behaviour of ones?

Author: The situation when behavior of host shared libraries and device shared libraries don't match. Should I rewrite it?

Reviewer 7: Probably.
I think `There are several cases when behaviours don't match` will fit it.

```
// Named array of properties.
struct _pi_device_binary_property_set_struct {
  char *Name;                                // the name
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesBegin; // array start
  pi_device_binary_property PropertiesEnd;   // array end
};
```
It contains name of property set and array of properties. Each property is
represented by the following struct:
```
struct _pi_device_binary_property_struct {
  char *Name;       // null-terminated property name
  void *ValAddr;    // address of property value
  uint32_t Type;    // _pi_property_type
  uint64_t ValSize; // size of property value in bytes
};
```

List of imported symbols is represented as a single property set with name
`SYCL/imported symbols` recorded in the `Name` field of property set.
Each property in this set holds name of the particular imported symbol recorded
in the `Name` field of the property.
List of exported symbols is represented in the same way, except the
corresponding set has the name `SYCL/exported symbols`.

### DPC++ runtime changes

DPC++ RT performs *device images collection* task by grouping all device
images required to execute a kernel based on the list of exports/imports and

> links them together using PI API.

Reviewer 2: I suggest that we add a sub-section about this `PI API` below: this API is important, as this is a part of interface between plugins and DPC++ RT and we don't even have its name listed here.

The sub-section could describe the API, its behavior (whether we assume that it is capable to link native binaries regardless of device or that it is some optional capability which should be checked before usage), possible implementation/limitations.

Author: Added, please see lines  236-259.

This native device image is then added to the cache to avoid symbol resolution,
compilation, and linking for any future attempts to invoke kernels from this
device image.

#### Device images collection and linking

Device images collection and linking is performed by DPC++ Runtime class named
`ProgramManager`.

When the program manager gets a request to JIT compile a device image(program)
it examines its list of imported symbols and finds device images which exports
those symbols, then links requested device image and images found together.

All needed device images are found by iterating through all available OS modules
without predefined order and searching for first unresolved symbol in list of
imports of target device image. Once device image that contains first symbol is

> met, remaining exported symbols are checked in found image. If

Reviewer 2: Should we say anything about types of device images more explicitly? I guess there is no sense in inspecting device images with native code if the application only contains a device image with SPIR-V

Author: Done.

they match some imported symbols then these matched symbols will be marked as
resolved. The procedure repeats until all imported symbols are marked as
resolved. In case all available device images are viewed, but some imported
symbols remain unresolved, exception will be thrown.

The following assumption is made: each device image represents some combination
of defined symbols (kernels or `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions) and different

> device images may contain only exactly the same or not overlapping combination
> of defined symbols. If this assumption is not correct, there can be two cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
device images either contain exactly the same symbols or not overlapping list
of defined symbols. If this assumption is not correct, there can be two cases:
```

device image.

#### DPC++ runtime plugin interface (PI) changes

Before creating a program the function `piextDeviceSelectBinary` is used to
choose the most appropriate device image. It is possible that not all backends
have possibility to link device images of particular format at run-time. So,
in presence of dynamic linking the `piextDeviceSelectBinary` function should be
extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image
based on additional attributes of device images, such as:
- List of imports (if present)
- Device image format
- Runtime linking support in corresponding backend

Example: the backend doesn't have support of native binaries linking at
run-time but linking of SPIR-V device images is supported,
the AOT-compiled device image with required kernel have imports
information attached which effectively means that this device image needs runtime
linking, but since native binaries linking is not supported, the image with
SPIR-V format will be chosen (or an error emitted if there is no other device
images).
To link several device images together `piProgramLink` API will be used.
Depending on concrete plugin implementation and set of device image formats that

> can be linked at run-time, `piProgramLink` API may receive device images in
> different states as inputs (including SPIR-V and native code) with a limitation
> that all inputs should have the same format.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be linked at run-time, `piProgramLink` API may receive device images in
either in SPIR-V format or in some native format.
```

Author: I think we need to emphasize that all device input device images should have one format.

##### Support of runtime linking in backends

> - The initial design will support dynamic linking of device code in SPIR-V

Reviewer 2: I think it is better say `initial implementation`, because the rest of design doesn't change with updates of a PI plugin implementation.

  format on OpenCL backend:
  - OpenCL plugin will use the existing OpenCL `clLinkProgram()` API to online
  link the SPIR-V modules together.
- The initial design will support dynamic linking of device code in native code
  format on the Level Zero backend:
  - L0 plugin will use the existing Level Zero `zeModuleDynamicLink()` API to do

>   the linking.

Reviewer 4: It seems like this uneven backend support will make it very difficult to use this new feature.  If the user wants to run on the CPU device (OpeCL backend), they **must** compile in AOT mode.  However, if the user wants to run on a GPU (Level Zero by default), they **must** compile w/o AOT mode.  There's no single compilation mode that will work for all devices.

I think it would be a big improvement if we could extend Level Zero to have the ability to online link SPIR-V modules.  This way, at least JIT mode would support all device types.

Author: Ok, that makes sense. I mentioned that new L0 API for SPIR-V linking is required.

Reviewer 2: > If the user wants to run on the CPU device (OpeCL backend), they must compile in AOT mode. However, if the user wants to run on a GPU (Level Zero by default), they must compile w/o AOT mode. There's no single compilation mode that will work for all devices.

It actually the opposite. However, looking at [Module section](https://spec.oneapi.com/level-zero/latest/core/api.html#module) of Level Zero specification, I can't find any limitations about `zeModuleDynamicLink`, so I would assume that it is also capable of linking `SPIR-V` images as well.

Reviewer 4: > However, looking at Module section of Level Zero specification, I can't find any limitations about zeModuleDynamicLink, so I would assume that it is also capable of linking SPIR-V images as well.

In Level Zero, a "module" is always native device code.  There's no such thing as a SPIR-V format module.  Therefore, zeModuleDynamicLink only links native device code, not SPIR-V.

Reviewer 2: > > However, looking at Module section of Level Zero specification, I can't find any limitations about zeModuleDynamicLink, so I would assume that it is also capable of linking SPIR-V images as well.
>
> In Level Zero, a "module" is always native device code. There's no such thing as a SPIR-V format module. Therefore, zeModuleDynamicLink only links native device code, not SPIR-V.

Fair enough, but since we should be able to create such modules from SPIR-V, to DPC++ RT layer it will look like SPIR-V can be linked as well. Unless I'm missing something from Level Zero spec

Reviewer 4: > Fair enough, but since we should be able to create such modules from SPIR-V, to DPC++ RT layer it will look like SPIR-V can be linked as well. Unless I'm missing something from Level Zero spec

Yes, this is possible, but I think it is not the best solution.  Relying on zeModuleDynamicLink is less efficient for two reasons: A) you lose any possibility of cross-module optimizations because those optimizations can only be done when the input is an IL like SPIR-V, and B) the "in-place" patching semantics of zeModuleDynamicLink mean that you sometimes need to make a copy of the input modules (this is because a second link operation might undo the effect of a previous link operation).

Since other DPC++ features need the SPIR-V linking API anyways, it seems better to make use of it with this shared library feature too in the case when the shared libraries contain SPIR-V.

Reviewer: > In Level Zero, a "module" is always native device code. There's no such thing as a SPIR-V format module. Therefore, zeModuleDynamicLink only links native device code, not SPIR-V.

From pure logic standpoint, not necessarily, actually. L0 linker could have SPIRV inputs, link them, then compile to produce native output, w/o ability to return the intermediate link result. Since with dynamic linking we never do tree- or graph-like hierarchical linking (it is always flat - N inputs and 1 output), that interface could be enough. But that'd be really inflexible, and either existing L0 link API should be extended to allow SPIRV inputs/SPIRV output or a new API added.

But, I think I wrote this before, there should be nothing device-specific in SPIR-V linkage process, and it would be more flexible and efficient (from code duplication standpoint) to host SPIRV linkage to SYCL RT level.
- more flexible means there can be runtimes which don't support SPIRV linkage but support SPIRV inputs (like LevelZero :) )
- efficient means all BEs don't need to repeat the spirv-link implementation.

If BE has SPIRV link capability, SYCL RT might decide to use it instead of the generic SPIRV linker it (SYCL RT) would have built-in.

Reviewer 4: > Since with dynamic linking we never do tree- or graph-like hierarchical linking (it is always flat - N inputs and 1 output), that interface could be enough.

The Level Zero `zeModuleDynamicLink` API does not have any outputs.  It does an "in-place" link, where the inputs are modified to perform the linking operation.  I guess your larger point is that the existing API could be used to do SPIR-v linking.  I'm not sure I agree with this, but the point is moot.  The existing implementation does not work this way.  Level Zero modules are native code, and `zeModuleDynamicLink` does an in-place link of the native code.

> But, I think I wrote this before, there should be nothing device-specific in SPIR-V linkage process, and it would be more flexible and efficient (from code duplication standpoint) to hoist SPIRV linkage to SYCL RT level.

Yes, I think we had this conversation already.  :-)  I agree that adding a SPIR-V linking phase into the DPC++ gives you more options.  However, I don't agree about the efficiency argument.  There are two types of efficiency:

* Runtime efficiency.  Here I think it would be less efficient if DPC++ links the SPIR-V because that would be a separate pass over the SPIR-V module.  DPC++ would read SPIR-V and then write another SPIR-V.  The backend would then read the second SPIR-V.  Compare this with a design where the backend reads the input SPIR-V only once and has a combined pass that does both linking and native code generation.

* Engineering efficiency.  I think this is what you are arguing.  I don't agree, though.  The DPC++ runtime does not currently have any dependency on SPIR-V, so this would be a new dependency if we add it to the runtime.  I think that makes it less efficient in an engineering sense.  If the backend does SPIR-V linking, then it may seem like this logic needs to be duplicated in both OpenCL and Level Zero, but I think this is not really the case.  Both of those backends use IGC as the JIT compiler, so the logic is in just one place.  Moreover, IGC must already know how to do SPIR-V linking because this is how OpenCL works today.  Therefore, we just want to expose that existing IGC capability through the Level Zero API.

Reviewer: > The Level Zero zeModuleDynamicLink API does not have any outputs.
...
> The existing implementation does not work this way. Level Zero modules are native code, and zeModuleDynamicLink does an in-place link of the native code.

Yes, I understand this. But that does not invalidate the statements I made, as far as I can see. In-place linking is inconvenient, but the linker API still has the output, represented in an exotic way though.

> Compare this with a design where the backend reads the input SPIR-V only once and has a combined pass that does both linking and native code generation.

In practice, I strongly suspect the additional time to parse SPIRV would be dwarfed by the JIT time. Besides, I proposed: "If BE has SPIRV link capability, SYCL RT might decide to use it instead of the generic SPIRV linker it (SYCL RT) would have built-in.". So I don't think what I suggested would lead to any performance degradation if designed properly. But there are  benefits
 - SPIRV dynamic linkage can still be supported for BEs w/o SPIRV linkage capabilities 
 - The SPIRV linkage could be exposed to the user giving ultimate flexibility for RT code management

> The DPC++ runtime does not currently have any dependency on SPIR-V, so this would be a new dependency if we add it to the runtime.

I disagree. DPC++ runtime does have SPIRV dependence. E.g. before creating a program it checks binary format, and redirects to createProgramWithIL (PI equivalent of it) if it is SPIRV. DPC++ as a whole relies on SPIRV as portable device code format and provides SPIRV tools, so: I neither agree with this:

> so this would be a new dependency if we add it to the runtime. I think that makes it less efficient in an engineering sense.

> If the backend does SPIR-V linking, then it may seem like this logic needs to be duplicated in both OpenCL and Level Zero, but I think this is not really the case.

the duplication will be there in case of multiple independent BEs who want to enjoy dynamic linking - from vendor X and vendor Y. It needs to be there even today, I believe - consider FPGA and CPU BEs.

Reviewer: One more important factor in having SPIRV linkage exposed independently of BE - it does not depend on particular BE :) On conceptual level, why one would need context or other BE binding to be able to link SPIRV in the host part of SYCL app?

# Dynamic linking of device code

This document describes purpose and design of dynamic linking of device code
feature.

## Background
Sometimes users want to link device code dynamically at run time. One possible
use case for such linkage - providing device functions via shared libraries.
The example below shows how device function `LibDeviceFunc` can be dynamically
linked to a SYCL app:
```
// app.cpp
SYCL_EXTERNAL int LibDeviceFunc(int i);
class KernelName;
/* ... */
Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {
CGH.parallel_for<KernelName>(/* ... */ [=](sycl::item i) {
  out[i] = LibDeviceFunc(i);
}); /* ... */
std::cout << out[i] << “ “;

// lib.cpp
int SYCL_EXTERNAL LibDeviceFunc(int i) {
  return i * 2;
}

// Commands
clang++ -fsycl lib.cpp -shared -o helpers.so

> clang++ -fsycl app.cpp -lhelpers -o a.out

Reviewer 2: > Isn't this going to create host library, while you are trying to illustrate linking of "device code"?

This is going to create a "fat" library, which contains both host and device code. Host part will be linked automatically by regular C++ toolchain and system linker, while for device part we have to introduce new functionality, which is described in this design document.

> Or, maybe SYCL_EXTERNAL cases build for device?

Yes, `SYCL_EXTERNAL` means that this function will be available in device code even though it wasn't called from any SYCL kernel function.

> Which device then?

As usual with non-AOT workflow we do not specify the target device, because we don't know it in advance. Our compiler just allows to enable offloading in general by using SPIR-V intermediate representation

> clang++ -fsycl app.cpp -lhelpers -o a.out

Reviewer 8: OK. Can this be clarified in the writing please?

> clang++ -fsycl app.cpp -lhelpers -o a.out

Author: Sure. Please check the paragraph that comes just after commands and let me know if it is enough to clarify.

./a.out
Output: 0 2 4 6…

```
It is possible to manually create `sycl::program` in both app and shared
library, then use `link` SYCL API to get a single program and launch kernels
using it. But it is not user-friendly and it is very different from regular
C/C++ workflow.

Another possible scenario - use functions defined in a pre-compiled device image
provided by the user. Example:
```
// a.cpp
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibDeviceFunc();
...
Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {
CGH.parallel_for([]() { LibDeviceFunc(); });
});

// b.cpp
/*no SYCL_EXTERNAL*/ void LibDeviceFunc() { ... }
```

> We have a `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function `foo` called from a kernel, but the

Author: It should be `LibDeviceFunc`. Will update.

application defined only host version of this function. Then user adds device

> image with definition of `foo` to the fat object via special compiler option

Author: Doesn't the rest of sentence say where and how?
> adds device image with definition of `foo` to the fat object via special compiler option

> image with definition of `foo` to the fat object via special compiler option

Reviewer 8: I guess I am asking for the more concise description. This is the first time "fat object" term is used in the document, and it should be shown more explicitly how to it is created and populated.

(like `-fsycl-add-targets`).

The main purpose of this feature is to provide a mechanism which allows to

> link device code dynamically at runtime, such as in the scenarios above.

Author: Ok, that makes sense, will add.

## Requirements:
User's device code that consists of some device API (`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions),
is compiled into some form and it is not linked statically with device code of
application. It can be a shared library that contains some device code or a

> separate device image supplied with properties attached. This code is linked

Reviewer 8: > some device code or a separate device image

How is "code" different from "image" here? To me this is using terminology too loosely.

Author: My understanding was that "device code" and "device image" mean the same thing here. I can align it to use only "device image" here.

Reviewer 8: My view of the "image" is like a wrapper around "code" that also contains some meta-data about the code. Is that not your understanding? It would be better to be consistent in the terminology within the document.

Author: > My view of the "image" is like a wrapper around "code" that also contains some meta-data about the code. Is that not your understanding?

No, not really. My was understanding that "device image" is an array of data that represents device "code" in some binary format, for example SPIR-V or native device code.
We have a way to attach some data to device images through properties mechanism but I tried to mention properties separately from device images.

Reviewer: To be 100% accurate, device image is [this](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/ed537bc53bc8f152a5c6b1057f6517220bfa2dd1/sycl/include/CL/sycl/detail/pi.h#L688). So it does include some extra info compared to device code.

dynamically at run time with device code of a user's application in order to
resolve dependencies.
For this combination the following statements must be true:

The presented dynamic device code linkage mechanism must:

- Allow to represent the actual dynamically linked code as a device binary image
  which can be:

>   - Embedded into a host shared object by standard SYCL compiler driver

Reviewer 8: > Embedded into a host shared object by standard SYCL compiler driver invocation

Can you re-phrase or clarify? Does this mean that the result of the linking can be saved into a host shared object? Which one? Who invokes driver, when and why?

Author: >  Does this mean that the result of the linking can be saved into a host shared object?

No, it means that host shared library may have some device binary image embedded (i.e. it is a "fat" shared library) and this embedded device binary image can be linked dynamically with other device binary images (for example embedded into an application's "fat" binary).

>Who invokes driver, when and why?

User, to compile a shared library. Like in this example https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/3210/files/9f2b787fdf609f1d81e48eb397262a773e4ed094#diff-016c758d0bc2153af2ad9b0add213f00c9ae352ac19f62dea2689b7f8d6e9c55R28

Reviewer 8: OK. Same ask, please make clarify this in the writing.

Author: Sure, I've added clarification.

    invocation
  - Embedded into a host binary or shared object using manual invocations of
    SYCL tools such as `clang-offload-wrapper` and linker

>   - Loaded into memory via special API

Reviewer 8: > Loaded into memory via special API

Into host memory from a file? Or something else? What is the API (SYCL, PI, anything else) envisioned?

Author: This is idea for a new API proposed by @kbobrovs in previous comments, see https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/3210#discussion_r613537978 .
I guess, the device image will be loaded into host memory from a file and this will be some SYCL API.

Reviewer 8: I see now. There is not enough info in what you have added. Also @romanovvlad is suggesting that standard dlopen could be made to work for that. If you want to leave this TODO then please describe the requirement more clearly.

Author: I don't have strong objections regarding such API since it can be more convenient than creation of (empty?) shared host object and loading via dlopen. I think we need to hear opinion regarding this suggestion from @kbobrovs since he originally proposed new API.

> - Must not assume the actual format of the device code - e.g. that it is SPIR-V

Reviewer 8: > Must not assume the actual format of the device code

Can you rephrase to be non-negative? E.g. "allow different format for device code"?

Author: Done.

  or native device binary
- Provide automatic runtime resolution of `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function references

>   within the SYCL app to their definitions (if found) within any suitable

Reviewer 8: > any suitable dynamically linked device binary image

Is it linked to the **host** binary or where? Please clarify where the search for "device code" is looking into

Author: > Is it linked to the host binary or where?

It is linked to other device binary images.

> Please clarify where the search for "device code" is looking into

I've tried to clarify it here:
https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/3210/files/9f2b787fdf609f1d81e48eb397262a773e4ed094#r618274713

Reviewer 8: Sorry, I don't see clarifications in the link you provided.

Author: Sorry for inconvenience. I meant the comment where I mentioned that there is an internal storage for device images inside `ProgramManager` runtime class. It stores all device images available during application runtime. Any search for "device code" will happen inside this storage and it will be search for some device image. If this is not what you were asking for, could you please clarify your question then?

  dynamically linked device binary image
- Support pointers to `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions across the dynamic linkage
  boundaries within the device code - taking a pointer, call through a pointer.
- Specific code changes are not required, i.e. the mechanism of linking works
  as close as possible to host shared libraries.

## Design
The overall idea:

- Each device image is supplied with a list of imported and exported symbol
  names through device image properties mechanism
- Before JIT-compiling a device image DPC++ RT will check if device image has a

>   list of imported symbols and if it has, then RT will search for device images

Reviewer 8: > RT will search for device images

where does it search?

Author: There is an internal storage inside `ProgramManager` runtime class. It stores all device images available during application runtime. I think the search will happen there.

Reviewer 8: > It stores all device images available during application runtime

"available" where? how the list of images is populated?

Author: > "available" where?

Available to runtime library. This is basically all device images that were embedded into "fat" application binary and all loaded "fat" shared libraries.

> how the list of images is populated?

Each "fat" object is a host binary with device binary(s) embedded. We have a tool named `clang-offload-wrapper` that generates host "wrapper" object for device code that embedded into host object. This "wrapper" object contains a struct (descriptor) with information about wrapped code and device binaries themselves. The "wrapper" object also adds call to registration function which will be invoked when parent host binary is loaded. This "registration" function receives (descriptor) as a parameter. The runtime library defines registration function, so when each host object is loaded the registration function is called. AFAIK the implementation of this function in runtime library (I can grep it as `__sycl_register_lib`) adds device images represented by the descriptor parameter to internal storage in `ProgramManager` class. I think it is better explained in the doc https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign.md#fat-binary-creation-details . I'm also not aware of internals of `clang-offload-wrapper` tool.

  which define required symbols using lists of exported symbols.
  - Besides symbol names, additional attributes are taken into account (like

>     device image format: SPIR-V or device asm)

Reviewer 8: > device asm

Do you really envision support of "asm", i.e. assembly text?

Author: I think the intention was to mention AOT compiled native device code. I'll fix that.

  - No logical binding between host module and export/import lists, i.e.
    resolution is performed w/o regard to containing host modules
- Actual linking is performed by underlying backend (OpenCL/L0/etc.)

>   - Underlying backend is the backend used by the SYCL RT to perform JIT

Reviewer 8: > perform JIT compilation of the program with symbols that need dynamic resolution.

What about AOT mode, how is that supported?

Author: The design doesn't assume format of device images being linked. So, AOT can be supported for some BE if there is support for native binaries linking.

Reviewer 8: OK, then why this is talking about JIT specifically. AOT binaries can participate in the linking too, I expect.

Author: You are right, I've tried to remove binding to JIT.

  compiler and allows to reduce JIT overhead

#### Device images collection and linking

Device images collection and linking of programs is performed by DPC++ Runtime
class named `ProgramManager`.

When the program manager gets a request to create a program object using device
image, it examines its list of imported symbols and finds device images which
export those symbols, then program manager creates programs for each required
device image and links them all together.

All needed device images are found by iterating through all available OS modules
without predefined order and searching for first unresolved symbol in list of
imports of target device image. During search device image format is taken
into account, i.e. only device images that have the same format as target device
image will be considered as suitable ones. Once suitable device image that
contains first symbol is met, remaining exported symbols are checked in found
image. If they match some imported symbols then these matched symbols will be
marked as resolved. The procedure repeats until all imported symbols are marked
as resolved. In case all available device images are viewed, but some imported

> symbols remain unresolved, exception will be thrown.

Reviewer 4: What exception will be thrown?  If we want to use one of the existing exception codes, I think it should either be `errc::runtime` or `errc::build`.  (See [Table 136](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#subsec:exception.class) in the SYCL 2020 spec.)  I think I have a slight preference for `errc::runtime`, so that we reserve `errc::build` for exceptions that happen when the application specifically asks to online compile or link a kernel bundle.

Author: `errc::build` seems more suitable for me, since usually OpenCL build APIs emit build error when incoming program has unresolved symbols. In addition, in regular c++ errors about unresolved symbols are usually emitted during build time. However this is not a strong preference, if we want to use `errc::runtime`, that is ok for me.
@s-kanaev , @romanovvlad , any opinion?

Reviewer 4: I was just looking at the DPC++ code in `program_manager`.  It looks like we currently throw `compile_program_error` if there is a JIT-time compilation error for a kernel.  This is most similar to the SYCL 2020 `errc::build` exception code, so I presume that is what we will throw in the future.  Therefore, it probably does make sense to throw `errc::build` if there are unresolved symbols.

spec constant values, JIT compiler options and device. Then concrete tuple is
mapped to a program object. Several tuples can be mapped to a same program
object, they are created during process of compilation and symbols resolution
for concrete device image. When some program is made through linking of several
programs created from device images that come from different OS modules,
for each OS module in cache will be created a tuple with corresponding OS module
id.
Example of modified cache structure when dynamic linking is involved:
```
// Application
// OSModule = 1

SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc();
queue.submit(parallel_for<InternalKernel>( ... ));

Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {
  CGH.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });
});

EnqueueLibraryKernel(q);

// Library
// OSModule = 2

SYCL_EXTERNAL LibFunc();

EnqueueLibraryKernel(queue) {
  queue.submit(parallel_for<ExternalKernel>(...));
}

Program cache will have the following structure:
 "InternalKernel" =>
   {1, ...} => program 1
 "ExternalKernel" =>
   {1, ...} => program 1
   {2, ...} => program 1
```
However the library code will be compiled twice if kernel from the library

> was enqueued before kernels from the application, i.e. in such case:

Reviewer 4: If you wanted to address this weakness (about compiling twice), I think you could do so by adding a "program state" to cache key.  To see how this would work, first consider a simple case where there are no shared libraries.  Here are the PI operations that are required:

```
pi_program1 = piProgramCreate(/*spir-v from OSMod 1*/);
/* possibly set values of spec constants */
piProgramCompile(pi_program1, dev, opts);
pi_program2 = piProgramLink(dev, opts, {pi_program1});
```

Note that we're calling `piProgramCompile()` followed by `piProgramLink()`, rather than just calling `piProgramBuild()`.  The reason for doing this will become clear later.

Since we are adding a "program state" to the cache key, we can cache both `pi_program1` and `pi_program2`:  The result of `piProgramCompile()` is an object state program image, while the result of `piProgramLink()` is an executable state program image.  Here are the entries in the cache:

```
[OSMod 1, spec consts, opts, dev, object] => pi_program1
[OSMod 1, spec consts, opts, dev, executable] => pi_program2
```

I think this is the same as what you propose, except I'm adding the "program state" to the cache key and I've cached `pi_program1` in addition to `pi_program2`.

Any future request to run a kernel from OS module 1 on the same device with the same spec constants and the same build options will search the cache for `[OSMod 1, spec consts, dev, executable]`, and it will find the `pi_program2` that we already built.

Now let's consider the case where there is device code in a shared library that needs to be online linked.  Using your example above, here are the PI operations that need to happen:

```
pi_program1 = piProgramCreate(/*spir-v from OSMod 1*/);
/* possibly set values of spec constants */
piProgramCompile(pi_program1, dev, opts);

pi_program2 = piProgramCreate(/*spir-v from OSMod 2*/);
/* possibly set values of spec constants */
piProgramCompile(pi_program2, dev, opts);

pi_program3 = piProgramLink(dev, opts, {pi_program1, pi_program2});
```

And we can put the following items in the cache:

```
[OSMod 1, spec consts, opts, dev, object] => pi_program1
[OSMod 2, spec consts, opts, dev, object] => pi_program2
[OSMod 1, spec consts, opts, dev, executable] => pi_program3
[OSMod 2, spec consts, opts, dev, executable] => pi_program3
```

Again, I think this is the same as what you propose except I have the new "program state" element in the key, and I'm caching some more `pi_program` objects.

If there is a subsequent attempt to submit `ExternalKernel`, the program manager will see that `ExternalKernel` comes from `OSMod 2`, and it will find `pi_program3` in the cache.  Again, this is exactly the same as your proposal.

Now, let's consider the case when `ExternalKernel` is submitted first.  The PI operations are:

```
pi_program1 = piProgramCreate(/*spir-v from OSMod 2*/);
/* possibly set values of spec constants */
piProgramCompile(pi_program1, dev, opts);
pi_program2 = piProgramLink(dev, opts, {pi_program1});
```

And the cache will be:

```
[OSMod 2, spec consts, opts, dev, object] => pi_program1
[OSMod 2, spec consts, opts, dev, executable] => pi_program2
```

Now, the application submits `InternalKernel`, and the PI operations are:

```
pi_program3 = piProgramCreate(/*spir-v from OSMod 1*/);
/* possibly set values of spec constants */
piProgramCompile(pi_program3, dev, opts);

pi_program1 = /* found in cache: [OSMod 2, spec consts, opts, dev, object]*/;

pi_program4 = piProgramLink(dev, opts, {pi_program3, pi_program1});
```

Notice that the redundant compilation of "OSMod 2" is eliminated because the result was in the cache.

Reviewer 4: > Do piProgramCompile and piProgramLink produce a distinct program object instead of modifying the source one?

`piProgramLink` creates a new program object, but `piProgramCompile` does not.  The logic I propose above only depends on `piProgramLink` creating a new program object.

> As for performing build in two steps instead of one (I am not really sure about it), the piProgramBuild could be a bit more optimized in time domain than piProgramCompile plus piProgramLink due to internals of backend.

Yes, this is a good point.  Looking at the implementation of `piProgramLink` in the Level Zero PI plugin, I think that code should check for the case when there is only one input.  We can optimize that case because it is not necessary to call `zeModuleDynamicLink`.

For OpenCL, we need to ask the team that implements the OpenCL driver whether it is much more efficient to call `clBuildProgram` vs. calling both `clCompileProgram` and `clLinkProgram`.

Author: Optimization of `piProgramCompile` & `piProgramLink` seems a bit out of the scope of this PR. I might include an improvement with object state programs in the cache though. Should I?

Reviewer 4: I do not have a strong opinion on expanding the cache to include object state as part of this design vs. doing it as a separate task.  If you decide not to do it as part of this design, I think you should enter a Jira to make sure it does happen at some point, though.  If you do this, the Jira could contain a link to this conversation (or copy the conversation into the Jira).

I think you should **not** split the calls to `piProgramBuild()` into separate `piProgramCompile()` / `piProgramLink()` calls unless you check that this won't introduce a performance regression.  The fix I mention above to the Level Zero implementation of `piProgramLink()` is probably a very small 3-liner.  You should also ask the OpenCL team about the efficiency of calling `clBuildProgram` vs. calling both `clCompileProgram` and `clLinkProgram`, though.

```
// Application
SYCL_EXTERNAL void LibFunc();

EnqueueLibraryKernel(Q); // First, library code is compiled alone since it
                         // doesn't have any dependencies
// ...
Q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &CGH) {
  handler.parallel_for([] { LibFunc(); });  // Second, library code is compiled
                                            // and linked together with code of
                                            // the application
});
```

The kernel caching mechanism is re-used without changes.

##### Persistent cache

The documented approach to persistent cache needs to be expanded in presence
of dynamic linking support. One of the identifiers for built image hash is
hash made out of device image used as input for the JIT compilation.
In case when "main" image have imports information, device image hash should be
created from all device images that are necessary to build it, i.e. hash out
of "main" device image and set of images that define all

> symbols imported by "main" device image.

Author: That is a good point. With the current scheme we cannot guarantee persistent order of device images. We could actually sort device images by some feature (like size, set of defined symbols and etc.) before creating a hash string. But the algorithm of search itself doesn't prevent using of different images to resolve dependencies, since it is assumed that the same symbol defined in several device images of the same format should have the same definition. However when some other device image is chosen to resolve dependency, it won't be technically the same program as the result of linking.
So, does sorting of device images before creation of hash string sounds ok?

> symbols imported by "main" device image.

Author: > Though, using OS module ID (a mere number) as sorting feature is of more optimized way.

Do you mean OS module handle? Isn't just a pointer?

https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/7d5ee05b5460c0df7090f32f59efa2fcb981d73d/sycl/include/CL/sycl/detail/os_util.hpp#L48

I'm not really sure that I understand how getting of OS module handle works, but can it change from run to run?

> symbols imported by "main" device image.

Reviewer 7: > Do you mean OS module handle? Isn't just a pointer?

My bad, then.

> symbols imported by "main" device image.

Author: @s-kanaev , do you mind if I make this addition and apply other NIT comments from you in the follow-up patch? I think it will take very much time to get all the approvals again.

> symbols imported by "main" device image.

Reviewer 7: I don't mind at all.

CGH.parallel_for([]() { foo(); });
});

// b.cpp
/*no SYCL_EXTERNAL*/ void foo() { ... }
```
We have a `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function `foo` called from a kernel, but the
application defined only host version of this function. Then user adds device
image with definition of `foo` to the fat object via special compiler option (like `-fsycl-add-targets`).

The main purpose of this feature is to provide a mechanism which allows to
link device code dynamically at runtime.

## Requirements:
User's device code that consists of some device API (`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions),
is compiled into some form and it is not linked statically with device code of
application. It can be a shared library that contains some device code or a
separate device image supplied with properties attached. This code is linked
dynamically at run time with device code of a user's application in order to
resolve dependencies.
For this combination the following statements must be true:

- `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions defined in dynamically linked code can be called
  (directly or indirectly) from device code of the application.
- Function pointers taken in application should work inside the dynamically

>   linked code.

Author: I'm not sure about this point:
> (NOTE: I think this one would be really useful, I suggest to add a TODO as potential design extension point) loaded into memory via analog of dlopen

Do you mean some specific SYCL API? Because if dlopen is used it will be just specific usage of dynamically linked code that "embedded into a host shared object by standard SYCL compiler driver invocation".

>   linked code.

Reviewer: I meant some new API, which would load a device library from disk (optionally returning `device_image`), and automatically make symbols defined in the loaded binary image available to SYCL runtime for resolution:
```cpp
// suppose, mylib.spv defines SYCL_EXTERNAL function foo, then this call:
device_image img = device_dlopen("mylib.spv");
// will make foo available for dynamic symbol resolution. If any subsequent JIT compilations
// try to compile device code with external reference to foo, it can now be resolved following
// the resolution mechanism described in this doc, and JIT compilation will succeed.
```

>   linked code.

Author: Ok, thanks. I mentioned that.

>   linked code.

Reviewer 9: Do we really need a new API? Can't we just suggest compiling marked with SYCL_EXTERNAL as a regular "fat" .so and then dlopen it? dlopen'ing should trigger device image registration, so such a device image should be available for symbols resolution.

>   linked code.

Reviewer: > Can't we just suggest compiling marked with SYCL_EXTERNAL as a regular "fat" .so and then dlopen it?

Sorry for delay. Yes, you are right, that should be the preferred way. But sometimes there is a need to load .spv originating from different tools - e.g. OpenCL. It would be UB trying to define kernels in this .spv and then trying to call them from SYCL, but it should be perfectly OK to link them with .spv originating from SYCL.

- Specific code changes are not required, i.e. the mechanism of linking works
  as close as possible to regular shared libraries.

## Design
The overall idea:

- Each device image is supplied with a list of imported and exported symbol
  names through device image properties mechanism

> - Before compiling a device image DPC++ RT will check if device image has a list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Before JIT-compiling a device image DPC++ RT will check if device image has a list
```

  of imported symbols and if it has, then RT will search for device images which

>   define required symbols using lists of exported symbols.

Reviewer: A note regarding "- Actual linking is performed by underlying backend (OpenCL/L0/etc.)" below.
Please specify what is the "underlying backend" in this case. There can be multiple co-existing in a SYCL RT, how the one is selected.

Author: I'm not sure that it is a part of current design. AFAIK backend is selected by user or by SYCL RT itself and this mechanism is independent from dynamic linking. I can use "target backend" or "chosen backend" here. Will this make sense?

Reviewer: I guess this is a matter of defining the "underlying" term. Maybe a note like "Underlying backend is the backend used by the SYCL RT to perform JIT compilation of the program with symbols that need dynamic resolution". There can be multiple such requests in parallel, and different BEs may be used (e.g. opencl/CPU and level_zero/GPU).

Author: Done.

Each property in this set holds name of the particular imported symbol recorded
in the `Name` field of the property.
List of exported symbols is represented in the same way, except the
corresponding set has the name `SYCL/exported symbols`.

### DPC++ runtime changes

DPC++ RT performs *device images collection* task by grouping all device
images required to execute a kernel based on the list of exports/imports and
links them together using PI API.

#### Device images collection

DPC++ Runtime class named ProgramManager stores device images using following
data structure:
```
/// Keeps all available device executable images added via \ref addImages.
/// Organizes the images as a map from a kernel set id to the vector of images
/// containing kernels from that set.
/// Access must be guarded by the \ref Sync::getGlobalLock()
std::unordered_map<SymbolSetId,
                   std::unique_ptr<std::vector<RTDeviceBinaryImageUPtr>>>
    m_DeviceImages;

using StrToKSIdMap = std::unordered_map<string_class, SymbolSetId>;
/// Maps names of kernels from a specific OS module (.exe .dll) to their set
/// id (the sets are disjoint).

> std::unordered_map<OSModuleHandle, SymbolSetId> m_SymbolSets;

Reviewer: NIT: `OSModuleHandle`s are no longer needed, as it was clarified by @gmlueck that two device binary images exporting the same function (name) is an error (unless these are two different code forms of the same function). So `OSModuleHandle` could be removed now if it would simplify design/implementation of the dynamic linkning.

Author: Yeah, @romanovvlad already mentioned it. However using of `OSModuleHandles`, so some parts (like cache) still depend on this thing. We agreed that once `OSOSModuleHandle` using is removed I'll update the doc accordingly.

Reviewer: ok

```
Assume each device image represents some combination of symbols and different
device images may contain only exactly the same or not overlapping combination
of symbols. If it is not so, there can be two cases:
  - Symbols are the same. In this case it doesn't matter which device image is
  taken to use duplicated symbol

>   - Symbols are not the same. In this case ODR violation takes place, such

Reviewer: You really mean that symbols themselves are the same in both cases, but their definitions (or values) are not - right? Otherwise there is no duplication. Please clarify in the doc.

Author: Right, will clarify.

>   - Symbols are not the same. In this case ODR violation takes place, such

Reviewer: One practical case of have the same symbol with different definitions is two compiled forms of the same function - SPIR-V and native. Resolution mechanism should pick the suitable one. ODR violation is when we have the same code format as well as the same symbol name, but different values.

Author: Do you mean the case when the same symbol has two definitions, but these two definitions are compiled into different formats of device binary?

Reviewer: Yes. One is SPIR-V, the other one is native - might be quite popular scenario. SYCL RT must choose one based on some policy (which maybe TBD) not just the fist with matching name.

Author: I mentioned that the case when two images of different format define the same symbol is not considered as ODR violation.

compilation, and linking for any future attempts to invoke kernels from this
device image.

#### DPC++ runtime plugin interface (PI) changes

Before creating a program the function `piextDeviceSelectBinary` is used to
choose the most appropriate device image. It is possible that not all backends
have possibility to link device images of particular format at run-time. So,
in presence of dynamic linking the `piextDeviceSelectBinary` function should be

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer 2: > One reason is that most of the logic will be the same for all plugins - finding transitive closure of modules to be linked, with some may having multiple formats, then removing formats for which there is no linking support.

Please note that `piextDeviceSelectBinary` is only intended to be used to find the **first** device image among several which contain a kernel which is launched by user. Basically here we decide on the format of all device images which will be used in online linking (if necessary): once the first image is known, we lookup its dependencies in RT, but only looking into device images of the same type.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer 8: Why do not allow linking of binaries of different types, SPIR-V linked with native code?

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Author: After offline discussion it become clear that we don't have problems with SPIR-V linking support. We may have some problems with "native" code linking, but I realized that we don't need described change in `piextDeviceSelectBinary` . Right now AOT compilers don't allow to compile device code with unresolved symbols.
If AOT compiler for particular backend allowed to generate some code with unresolved symbols, then this backend should be able to link this code. In other words it is not possible to meet device image with "native code" format without ability to link it.
It also seems that we could allow linking of binaries of different types, however we need to define mechanism for case when both formats are available. So, when both formats for dependency resolution are available I suggest the following:
- If target image is SPIR-V, then runtime should pick SPIR-V device images to resolve dependencies, so ability for link time optimizations won't be lost
- If target image is native code, then runtime should pick native code device images to resolve dependencies, so additional JIT is not required.

@kbobrovs , @AlexeySachkov , @smaslov-intel do you agree? If yes, I'll update the doc accordingly, otherwise please share your thoughts.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: > Please note that piextDeviceSelectBinary is only intended to be used to find the first device image among several which contain a kernel which is launched by user. Basically here we decide on the format of all device images which will be used in online linking (if necessary): once the first image is known, we lookup its dependencies in RT, but only looking into device images of the same type.

With dynamic runtime linkage this logic should be extended. Your suggestion:
- piextDeviceSelectBinary selects single preferable binary image `A` out of, say [`native_arch_xv1`, `native_arch_xv2`, `SPIRV`], and say, `native_arch_xv2` is selected
- SYCL RT then resolves `A`'s dependencies looking into import lists of only `native_arch_xv2` device binary images, by building a transitive closure of `depends` module relation
If at some step there is no binary with needed `native_arch_xv2` format, linkage fails.

My suggestion is to repeat that process for all available formats in the order of preference, until linkage succeeds. The order of preference can be determined by `piextDeviceSelectBinary` - in the above example, `native_arch_xv2` should be removed after linkage failure, and at step 2 only [`native_arch_xv1`, `SPIRV`] is on the menu for `piextDeviceSelectBinary `. `native_arch_xv1` may fail too, and only `SPIRV` may succeed.
Plugin does not have enough scope to decide that SPIRV should eventually be selected, this is SYCL RT responsibility.

Does that sound reasonable?

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: > Right now AOT compilers don't allow to compile device code with unresolved symbols.

I don't think this is true for GPU native code. zeDynamicLink wouldn't have existed otherwise. Looking forward, other AOT compilers for targets should allow unresolved symbols. So the design should accommodate that.

> It also seems that we could allow linking of binaries of different types, however we need to define mechanism for case when both formats are available.

Are you taking about mixing different types in single module's linkage? That's is a really good point, which I also thought about. Say, we have module A in `native_arch_xv1` format and B in `SPIRV` format, and A has unresolved symbols defined in B. Then we may resolve it by first compiling B to  `native_arch_xv1` if possible, then doing linkage. But I would just mention this as a TODO and leave for future incremental improvement.

Regarding the format selection logic - I described my view above. Hope this makes sense.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer 4: > I don't think this is true for GPU native code. zeDynamicLink wouldn't have existed otherwise

I believe it is true and there is an open bug report.  My understanding is that we have never used `zeDynamicLink` in DPC++ yet because `zeModuleCreate` always fails when there is an unresolved symbol.  Obviously, this is a critical bug for this new proposed feature if we want to support AOT mode, so we should call out the dependency and make sure there is a commitment to get it fixed.

> Regarding the format selection logic - I described my view above.

I think you only address the case where all the formats are variants of different **native** code images.  What if there is both a SPIR-V image and a native code image?  Before this shared library proposal, the choice was easy.  It was always better to choose the native code image in such a case (because it eliminates the JIT overhead).  Now, there is a trade-off, so the choice isn't clear:

* You could select all the native code images and link them with `zeDynamicLink`.  This avoids JIT overhead, but loses out on inter-module optimizations.
* You could  select all the SPIR-V images and compile/link them with a proposed extension to `zeModuleCreate`.  This suffers a JIT overhead, but potentially results in faster device code due to inter-module optimizations.

How do you decide which one the user wants?

A reasonable option might be to look at the image containing the kernel function that we want to launch.  If that image has a native code version of the kernel function, assume the user prefers AOT mode and link with `zeDynamicLink`.  If the kernel function only exists in SPIR-V, prefer SPIR-V for all its dependencies too and compile everything with `zeCreateModule`.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: > I believe it is true and there is an open bug report.

OK, thanks for reminding. This won't be true soon. Linkage of Gen native code is something invoke_simd will (at least initially) rely on, so this bug should be fixed for sure.

> I think you only address the case where all the formats are variants of different native code images. 

No, I considered the case "piextDeviceSelectBinary selects single preferable binary image A out of, say [native_arch_xv1, native_arch_xv2, SPIRV], and say, native_arch_xv2 is selected". piextDeviceSelectBinary decides about format preferences, SYCL RT sees which format is possible at all. It should be possible to override behavior of piextDeviceSelectBinary. Either via env var or via an extension API from the program.

> A reasonable option might be to look at the image containing the kernel function that we want to launch. 

There can be multiple binary images of different formats containing definition of the same kernel. I described above the process which would allow to make good decision, IMO.

Even in case of single available format for a kernel - native - there are options. Native could be linked with SPIRV after the SPIRV is compiled to native.

> If the kernel function only exists in SPIR-V, prefer SPIR-V for all its dependencies too and compile everything with zeCreateModule.

In the existing design the decision about format preferences is `piextDeviceSelectBinary` responsibility . Each plugin can decide as it sees fit. Maybe taking into account env var or requests via extension API calls I mentioned above.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer 4: > No, I considered the case "piextDeviceSelectBinary selects single preferable binary image A out of, say [native_arch_xv1, native_arch_xv2, SPIRV], and say, native_arch_xv2 is selected". piextDeviceSelectBinary decides about format preferences

Oh, sorry.  I missed that SPIR-V was in that list.  I assume that "binary image A" here is the image that contains the kernel function that the application wants to launch?

I think we plan for the device library fall-back code to be distributed in SPIR-V format.  Once this is the case, many kernels may require linking with this SPIR-V module.  Once we support shared libraries with AOT (native) modules, it will be common to link these AOT modules with the SPIR-V device library fall-back code.  Therefore, we will need to support mixed native / SPIR-V linking anyways.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: > I assume that "binary image A" here is the image that contains the kernel function that the application wants to launch?

yes

> Therefore, we will need to support mixed native / SPIR-V linking anyways.

I agree with that. I guess the main question  is about timing - do you suggest to implement this in the first step? My suggestion was:

> But I would just mention this as a TODO and leave for future incremental improvement.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Author: I think the situation when mixed linking is required can be pretty common. For example because compilation of SPIR-V is not enforced when user requested AOT. However I don't have a strong opinion regarding timings.
The algorithm described here by @kbobrovs :
> piextDeviceSelectBinary selects single preferable binary image A out of, say [native_arch_xv1, native_arch_xv2, SPIRV], and say, native_arch_xv2 is selected
SYCL RT then resolves A's dependencies looking into import lists of only native_arch_xv2 device binary images, by building a transitive closure of depends module relation
If at some step there is no binary with needed native_arch_xv2 format, linkage fails.
My suggestion is to repeat that process for all available formats in the order of preference, until linkage succeeds. The order of preference can be determined by piextDeviceSelectBinary - in the above example, native_arch_xv2 should be removed after linkage failure, and at step 2 only [native_arch_xv1, SPIRV] is on the menu for piextDeviceSelectBinary . native_arch_xv1 may fail too, and only SPIRV may succeed.

may need changes in case we want to use mixed linking. With mixed linking, linkage of device image `A` of `native_arch_xv2`  format shouldn't fail if there is SPIR-V image that contains required export.

If we are not going to target mixed linking in the first iteration, then I'll update the doc with this algorithm without changes, since it seems reasonable for me.
@kbobrovs please share your opinion.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Author: Yes, the searching algorithm itself is more or less clear to me.
However I've got one more question.
> if it can link native format

I guess there is a way (at least in OpenCL) to query whether compiler and linker available. However I'm not sure there is any option to ask if it can link native binaries. My original idea was that PI plugin implementation for concrete backend will answer this question, however If I understand your previous comments correctly, it shouldn't be there. So, how we can understand in SYCL RT whether target backend can or cannot link native binaries?

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: > My original idea was that PI plugin implementation for concrete backend will answer this question, however If I understand your previous comments correctly, it shouldn't be there.

Not sure which my comment makes you think so. I think this is exactly the way it should be implemented. Some new PI function to enumerate BE capabilities. It should be fine-grained enough to distinguish between devices covered by a plugin, between different formats.
@smaslov-intel, @romanovvlad - do you have ideas here?

Note that SYCL spec already requires RT to be able to answer device aspect queries, such as `online_linker`, which adds similar requirements.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Author: Maybe we can extend `pi_device_info` enum (https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/07b279653d9e0808f21fe7dc11b6efba7887686c/sycl/include/CL/sycl/detail/pi.h#L289) with a new value that will answer the question regarding possibility of native binaries linkage. Something like `PI_DEVICE_INFO_DYNAMIC_LINKER_AVAILABLE`.
So we can re-use `piDeviceGetInfo` API.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: Will it cover:
>  It should be fine-grained enough to distinguish between devices covered by a plugin, between different formats.

?

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: An example: BE can link SPIRV, but can't link native. Or vice versa. If we can make `piDeviceGetInfo` cover this - I'm OK. Maybe via two new kinds of info instead of one.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer 8: If we do add a query interface then extending existing `piDeviceGetInfo` does sound like the right approach. Let me ask however, what would SYCL RT do differently if backend reports no support for dynamic linking? Can this something be based of `piProgramLink` returning an error?

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: Good question.
The scenario can be like this: SYCL RT sees two binary image formats available for a function. It also sees that both have dynamic dependencies and need to be linked, Using `piProgramLink` to detect whether any of the two formats can be linked may bring significant overhead - first we need to prepare data, then  `piProgramLink` may take some time to report an error. So it seems much cleaner way not to try to use capabilities not supported by the BE.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Author: > what would SYCL RT do differently if backend reports no support for dynamic linking?

It will affect choice of device images. For example: there is a request from user to run particular kernel. There is two device images available that contain required kernel name: in SPIR-V format and native. However kernel and therefore device images that contain this kernel have import symbol, i.e. dependency. The required symbol is defined by some other device image, say it exists only in SPIR-V format. If backend don't support dynamic linking of native binaries, then RT will use SPIR-V image that contains kernel and link it on SPIR-V level with device image with required symbol. Otherwise it could use native format to minimize JIT cost. Or another example, if device image with required symbol exists only in native format and device reports no support for native binaries linking, then RT will emit an error, since there is no way to resolve dependencies and therefore get an executable program.
> BE can link SPIRV, but can't link native. Or vice versa. If we can make piDeviceGetInfo cover this - I'm OK.

Inside PI plugin we can understand on which device we are working on, right? I guess if yes, then we can just make some switch by device name/type and based on current information about support return positive or negative answer. Yes, seems a bit hardcoded, but doesn't require OpenCL extensions.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: > Inside PI plugin we can understand on which device we are working on, right? I guess if yes, then we can just make some switch by device name/type and based on current information about native linking support and return positive or negative answer. Yes, seems a bit hardcoded, but doesn't require OpenCL extensions.

Hm, I don't see what you mean. Only RT knows what formats are available for particular device and what type of linkage (SPIRV or native) might be needed. If BE supports linking of just one of the two (or three) formats, how it can report which one is supported via single boolean property? We may make `piDeviceGetInfo` with `PI_DEVICE_INFO_DYNAMIC_LINKER_AVAILABLE` argument return a list of bools, one per linkage type - that would work too.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer 8: BTW, is this backend specific info or really device specific capability? If it the earlier (very likely)  then maybe the proper way would be to add new "extension" into `piPlatformGetInfo/PI_PLATFORM_INFO_EXTENSIONS` instead.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Author: > is this backend specific info or really device specific capability?

I would say that it is backend capability, but doesn't each device have specific backend? I mean, we have OpenCL CPU backend and OpenCL GPU backend.
I'm not sure that using of platform info is a proper way. If I understand it correct, in general in OpenCL platform may contain several devices. And we can get a situation when platform contains several devices, but support for native code linking is implemented not for all of them. I guess for the same reason OpenCL defines queries like "compiler/linker_available" for particular device, but not platform.

> I don't see what you mean. 

My idea was that `PI_DEVICE_INFO_DYNAMIC_LINKER_AVAILABLE` will answer only the question "if native code linking supported?". However it is not flexible if we for example may have several "close to native" but linkable device code formats.

> We may make piDeviceGetInfo with PI_DEVICE_INFO_DYNAMIC_LINKER_AVAILABLE argument return a list of bools, one per linkage type - that would work too.

I like this idea. We can even return a list of supported formats as a string with separators, since return parameter of `piDeviceGetInfo` has `void*` type.
```
__SYCL_EXPORT pi_result piDeviceGetInfo(pi_device device,             
                                        pi_device_info param_name,    
                                        size_t param_value_size,      
                                        void *param_value,            
                                        size_t *param_value_size_ret);
```
As I can see similar is used in OpenCL, example `CL_PLATFORM_EXTENSIONS`. Something like
| pi_device_info | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `PI_DEVICE_INFO_LINKING_FORMATS` | Return type: char[]. Returns space separated list of devic images formats that can be linked at runtime by backend implementation for this device |

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: Another alternative is to ask the BE/device if it supports particular [format](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/47aeafa8a180ee2f5dfb741f54defbe25e8a78a7/sycl/include/CL/sycl/detail/pi.h#L660) RT found in the binary image descriptor. 

It seems more convenient to use, as SYCL RT does not need to iterate through the list of returned formats, no need to manage storage for the list.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer: > If I understand it correct, in general in OpenCL platform may contain several devices.

This is good point. Per-device granularity is more accurate.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Author: > Another alternative is to ask the BE/device if it supports particular format RT found in the binary image descriptor.

I'm not sure that I see how it can be done through existing `piDeviceGetInfo` API, so it will probably require some new PI function. @smaslov-intel , do you have any preference?

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Reviewer 8: Me preference would be not to add new PI interface for this. We should extend `piDeviceGetInfo`. Note, that there is existing `PI_DEVICE_INFO_EXTENSIONS` to query device extensions. So, maybe, just define few new extensions, and check for them in SYCL RT. They should be documented in pi.h then.

> extended, so it chooses the appropriate device image

Author: Ok, I've made a change to PI section, please review. If this is ok, I can prepare a PR to pi.h.
